BASIC
Catch the Fishing Fever
Kentucky Department of
Fish and Wildlife Resources

Welcome to the world of fishing. You are about to join the
ranks of thousands of like-minded anglers – some of the best
conservationists on earth. Each of them started right where
you are today…as a beginner. You will learn from experience and from
friends and family. You will share lifetime memories with them.
As a parent, I realize how important time management has
become. My own family must plan to enjoy family activities and
events. You are beginning an activity that takes practice and patience
to become successful. Try to keep this in mind…fishing is a life-long
sporting challenge. It is one you will be able to pass to your children
and future generations. It is time well spent.
Fish is definitely good food, and time spent with family is a
treasure, but time spent fishing is also healthy for you. Stress is a major
factor in today’s world, and stress relief can not be better defined than
a day’s fishing. Fishing also helps each individual develop a sense of
stewardship for aquatic resources that support fish and responsibility
to maintain a healthy environment.
You’ll enjoy fishing. The information in this book will help you
find the fishing gear you will need. Don’t forget your positive attitude,
friendly nature, and a good friend. You’ll soon find that you are
hooked on a lifetime of enjoyment.
Commissioner, Kentucky Department of
Fish & Wildlife Resources

BASIC
FISHING
A Cooperative Program of the
Kentucky Department of
Fish and Wildlife Resources
Alabama Division of Wildlife
and Freshwater Fisheries,
Alabama Department of Conservation
and Natural Resources
Originally created by: Revised by:
Doug Darr Lonnie Nelson
Alabama Aquatic Kentucky Aquatic
Education Coordinator Education Coordinator
Visit us on the Web at: Visit us on the Web at:
www.conservation.alabama.gov/agfd www.fw.ky.gov
Revised 2003

FOREWORD
This written information is adapted from the work of Doug Darr of
the Alabama Division of Wildlife and Freshwater Fisheries. It has been
edited for use in Kentucky with photographs replacing drawings wher-
ever possible. This edition is intentionally created “state free” so other
states can use it without extensive editing. In the original Alabama
version, many individuals and state “Fish and Wildlife” departments
contributed. This only emphasizes the fact that fishing and the stew-
ardship of our natural resources are national passions, not restricted to
any state or agency.
For the Kentucky version, I am thankful for the guidance received
from fellow employees John Boone, Information & Education Division,
on computer layout, Bonny Laflin, Fisheries Division, for stimulating
the internet page, and all Directors who supported this endeavor.
This brochure and web site entry is funded by Sportfish Restora-
tion funds. Fishery management, aquatic education and boating access
programs are not funded through general tax money. Fishery manage-
ment and aquatic education are funded by anglers through license
fees and an excise tax on the purchase of fishing equipment. Boating
access projects are funded by an excise tax on gasoline.
This material is intended to be used by not-for-profit organizations.
CLICK HERE
for more information
on Fishing
i - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - v

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Foreword ---------------------------------------------------------------- i
Table of Contents ---------------------------------------------------- ii
Introduction ----------------------------------------------------------- 2
Safety Equipment ----------------------------------------------------- 3
Basic Fishing Skills ---------------------------------------------------- 4
Section 1. TACKLE --------------------------------------------------- 4
Fishing Pole Selection ------------------------------------------ 4
Assembly --------------------------------------------------------- 6
Knot Tying -------------------------------------------------------- 6
Section 2. CASTING PRACTICE -------------------------------- 9
Body Position ---------------------------------------------------- 9
Beginning Casting -------------------------------------------- 10
Advanced Casting -------------------------------------------- 11
Section 3. FISHING TECHNIQUES --------------------------- 12
Choosing Appropriate Tackle ------------------------------- 12
Adjusting the Drag ------------------------------------------- 14
Holding the Pole --------------------------------------------- 14
Retrieving ------------------------------------------------------ 14
Setting the Hook --------------------------------------------- 14
Playing the Fish ----------------------------------------------- 15
Section 4. GOING FISHING ----------------------------------- 15
Think Safety --------------------------------------------------- 15
Choosing Where to Fish ------------------------------------ 16
What Fish Live Here? --------------------------------------- 18
Choosing Bait ------------------------------------------------- 20
Section 5. CARING FOR THE CATCH ------------------------ 21
Catch and Release ------------------------------------------- 21
Catch and Keep ---------------------------------------------- 22
Cleaning Your Catch ----------------------------------------- 23
Final Touches for Fillets--------------------------------------- 29
Caring for Cleaned Fish ------------------------------------- 29
Glossary ------------------------------------------------------------- 30
Ethics ----------------------------------------------------------------- BC
BBAASSICIC F FISISHHININGG -- ivi

INTRODUCTION
This short course is designed to give basic
fishing knowledge to those with limited fish-
ing experience and to stimulate anglers to learn
more. The objective is to help the new angler
have safer and more enjoyable fishing trips. Once
they learn the fundamentals, Basic Fishing will be
a handy reference as beginning anglers move for-
ward in fishing. Numbered pictures are presented
with the text. A glossary of fishing terms is found
on the inside back cover.
2 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 3

Safety Equipment
When people are learning a new activity, personal safety has to be
the first consideration. Safety equipment includes:
• Personal Floatation Device (PFD) or life jackets. While PFDs must be
readily available for each person on a boat, they are equally im-
portant when you are fishing from shore. PFDs are strongly recom-
mended for all anglers when fishing near deep or swift water. If
leading a group of youngsters in these conditions, they should be
mandatory.
• Throwable floatation with a rope attached is recommended if sev-
eral new anglers are fishing in the same area.
• Suntan lotion with a minimum SPF 15 is recommended.
• Insect repellent and medicine may be needed for stings or bites.
• Sunglasses protect the eyes from glare and from errant fish hooks.
• A hat protects the wearer from flying lures.
• Wear appropriate clothes and protective gear for anticipated weather.
2 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 3

Basic Fishing Skills
Participants who use this information will be introduced to the vari-
ous types of equipment, tackle, and learning experiences. After learning
how to assemble the fishing equipment and stringing the line, budding
anglers will experience knot tying and simple techniques used to cast.
They will then learn to hook appropriate bait to catch common fish. In
all cases, we hope these lessons lead to fishing adventures.
As you plan to go fishing, you need to know where to place your
bait. Habitat features that typically attract fish will be described. We
certainly hope you catch fish, so fish handling, cleaning and preparation
of the catch will also be discussed.
Section 1. TACKLE
Fishing tackle is the connection between the angler and the fish.
The fishing tackle is necessary both to get the lure or bait to the fish
and to get the fish to the angler.
A. Fishing Pole Selection
Fishing poles are named for the reel (or lack of reel) that holds the
fishing line. Each type of fishing reel has an appropriate fishing rod that
goes with it.
1. Pole and Line. (Figure 1). The simplest gear is a pole with fishing line
attached to the end. It is used with a float and hook or lure. This
gear is simple yet very effective for fish in shallow water.
2. Spincast Gear. (Figure 2). Spincast gear, a simple rod with a reel,
is usually the appropriate rod and reel for beginning anglers. The
fishing line comes out of a hole in the reel cover. The thumb button
releases the line or stops the line from going too far. Spincast gear is
used to cast light to medium size lures.
3. Spinning Gear. (Figure 3). Spinning reels can cast farther than
spincast gear. The fishing line on a spinning reel is exposed, and the
index finger is used to release the line and to control the line. Vari-
ous spinning gear is used for casting very light to heavy lures.
4. Baitcast Gear. (Figure 4). Baitcast gear has more control than spin-
ning gear. In a casting reel, the fishing line rotates the spool as the
line comes off the spool. During the cast, the thumb is used to
release the line and for control. Bait casting gear is used to cast
moderate to very heavy weights farther than other reels.
4 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 5

5. Fly. (Figure 5).A fly rod works differently than other rods. In fly fish-
ing the lure is carried by the line instead of the lure carrying the
line. The fly rod casts very light lures typically made of feathers, fur
or fibers. Fly fishing is not difficult, but it normally takes training and
practice to learn properly.
2
3
4
1 5
(Figures 1-5)
4 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 5

B. Assembly
When you buy a new fishing pole, it usually requires assembly.
• Remove all parts from the package.
• Put the sections of the rod together with all guides lined up in a
straight line.
• Different reels attach in different ways. Loosen the attachment de-
vice and place the reel into the seat of the rod with front of the reel
pointed toward the guides.
• Tighten the attachment device snugly but do not use too much
pressure, as plastic parts may break or threads will strip.
• Some reels come without line. Follow package directions if line
needs to be added.
• Release line from reel and thread line through all guides.
• Attach appropriate tackle for intended fishing or casting.
C. Knot Tying
Tying quality knots is the single most important skill that should
be learned. A knot that connects the hook or lure to your line is the
most important knot to learn. There are several that work well, such
as Improved Clinch, Palomar, Uni, and Surgeon knots. This pamphlet
will describe these knots with diagrams for tying them.
Other knots are used for special purposes such as connecting
fishing lines together. When you buy fishing line, maintain the manu-
facturer’s pamphlet in your tackle box. You should pick a favorite knot
and master the skill of tying it.
Improved Clinch Knot
The improved clinch knot is a basic knot for beginning anglers to use
with monofilament line. To tie an improved clinch knot:
Standing end:
2. make
Line
leading back
five turns
to pole or rod around the
standing
1 end of the
Tag end: line (more
1. pass the line End of for lighter
through the eye fishing line 2 line),
of the hook,
6 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 7

3. pass the tag end through the “tear drop”
loop above eye,
4. pass the tag end through the “big loop”,
5. moisten the line and slide the knot tight
against the eye.
3
4 5
Palomar Knot
The palomar knot is also a good knot for beginning anglers, as it is
strong and easy to tie. To tie a palomar knot:
1. double about 4 inches of line and pass loop through hook or lure
eye, (for small openings, pass line through, then pass through in op-
posite direction creating the loop)
2. tie an overhand knot with loop and doubled line,
3. pass hook or lure completely through line loop, and
4. moisten line and pull knot tight against the eye.
1 2
3 4
6 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 7

1
2
3
4
REMEMBER !
Standing end: Line leading
back to pole or rod
5
Tag end: End of fishing line
Uni-Knot
The uni knot is a third option. It is a very reliable knot for tying hooks
to line or flies to leaders. To tie the uni knot:
1. pass the line through the eye of the hook,
2. pull 5-6 inches through the eye and form a loop above the standing
line,
3. take the tag end around the standing line and inside the loop four
to five times,
4. bring the tag end out the top of the loop,
5. pull on the standing line to tighten the knot.
Surgeon’s End Loop
The surgeons end loop is used to tie a
loop at the end of a fishing line. To tie
a surgeons end loop:
1. double about 4 inches of line and 1
tie an overhand knot with it,
8 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 9

2. bring doubled end
through the loop once
again, and
3. hold both the stand-
ing end and tag end
and pull loop to
tighten knot.
2
For all knots, when
the knot is complete,
cut the tag end cleanly
about 1⁄4 inch from the
knot and discard the
tag end properly.
3
Section 2. CASTING PRACTICE
(Group activity explained, works for individuals)
A. Body position
Before using a fishing rod, new anglers should understand body
position and hand and arm action.
• Start with caster’s feet and shoulders square to the target. This is ac-
complished by having them point the toes of both feet at the target
area.
• Next, toss a tennis or ping pong ball overhand (action similar to
throwing a dart) a few feet for accuracy (hit my hand). Make sure
they keep their shoulders square.
This is the desired body and arm action for accurate casting. Re-
lease of the ball is at a similar position as thumb release when casting.
Now transition to fishing rods, with spincast rods recommended.
8 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 9

B. Beginning Casting
When learning to cast a fishing pole for the first time, it is recom-
mended to have new anglers tie on a casting plug without hooks,
using newly learned knots.
• As safety is an important habit to establish, each person should
check the immediate area around and above him/her to be sure
each caster has plenty of space.
• Reel in line so casting plug hangs a few inches from the tip of
the rod.
• Line all casters across the casting area.
• Have all anglers point the fishing rod at an object on the horizon
with the hands comfortably at the waist. (Some youth may have dif-
ficulty holding the pole with one hand, so the rod may be held with
one hand or two.) This is the 3 o’clock position.
• Have each caster raise the rod
to 1:30 clock position (normal
release point), push the push
button with their thumb, and
practice sliding thumb off the
button (release the line). If line
does not come out, pull line
slightly to start. Reel the plug
back to original position, a few
inches from the tip. Repeat as
necessary.
• When ready to cast, the casters
should slowly move the rods to
point them slightly behind the
shoulder of the casting arm, the
11 o’clock position. Hands should
be slightly above and in front of
the shoulder with forearms nearly
straight up and down. Hold this
position momentarily to concen-
trate.
10 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 11

• With the thumb of the
casting arm, push and
hold the push button on
the reel. To cast, the hand
should go up slightly and
forward as the caster ex-
tends the arm.
• By rotating the wrist,
move the rod back toward
the 3 o’clock position in a
quick motion, extending
the arm forward.
• Slide the thumb off the
button at the same point
as they originally released
the ball (approximately 1:
30 clock position).
• Stop the fishing rod with it
pointed slightly above the
original target.
If the lure went too
high and fell short, angler
released the button too
soon. If the lure went too
low and fell short, the but-
ton was released too late.
C. Advanced Casting
When anglers advance from spincasting to spinning or baitcast-
ing, the overhead cast is the easiest cast with which to start. However,
after mastering basic casting with each type of equipment, the angler
needs to vary the position of the rod for different situations. Advanced
casting can include a quick transition from 3 o’clock to 11 o’clock and
back forward (constant motion) to add the rod’s “catapult” action.
10 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 11

Section 3. FISHING TECHNIQUES
A. Choosing Appropriate Tackle
Terminal tackle is the tackle between the fish and the rod.
Hooks. Hooks keep fish attached to your line.
Hooks must be kept sharp. Hooks come in
many sizes and types. Ask your bait and
tackle dealer what is appropriate for the
species you are trying to catch and the
bait you are using. The size fishing line or
leader you are using should be dependent
on the size hook you are using. If you get
nibbles, but you are not catching them, switch
to a smaller hook.
Snaps and swivels. Most hooks and lures
are more effective without snaps or snap-swivels
attached. Crank baits (wobbling lures) are the ex-
ception. If you are trying a variety of lures, a small
but strong snap will make changing lures easier. A
swivel or three-way swivel can be used to attach a
dropper that keeps bait or lures off the bottom.
Weights or Sinkers. Only enough weight
should be used to cast the bait and keep it
at the desired depth. More weight will be
needed in windy weather or swift water. To
prevent losing a fish, weights should be at-
tached carefully, especially when they clamp on
the fishing line directly between the hook and the angler.
Floats. Floats are used to keep
baits off the bottom and to assist with
detecting a bite. The float should be
just large enough to do the job; if the
float is too large, the fish will feel it
and may not become hooked.
12 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 13

Other tackle that is helpful in fishing (Figure 10) includes a tackle
box to hold all equipment. A sharpening stone keeps hooks and
knives sharp. A lure retriever frees lures. A rag keeps your hands
clean. Fingernail clippers or scissors safely cut fishing line. A pair of
long nose pliers with wire cutters is useful for holding and removing
fish hooks.
A fish basket keeps smaller fish alive until you finish your fishing
trip. Some anglers land fish with a net after they are hooked; landing
nets are more critical for large fish, fish with spines such as catfish,
and fish with sharp teeth such as musky, sauger and walleye. A cooler
with ice keeps your catch fresh. A thin, flexible fillet knife makes it
easier to clean fish. An inch ruler measures fish to verify legal length.
An angler’s diary helps you become a better angler by reminding you
of how fish were caught, what the weather was like, and what the fish
were eating.
d
c
b
a
e
f
g
Figure 10. Tackle that is helpful to the beginning angler: (a) stringers
or floating fish baskets can help keep fish fresh, (b) bait containers, (c)
tackle box, (d) a landing net is useful with large fish, (e) a fillet knife is
designed specifically for fish, (f) long nose pliers are a useful all-around
tool, (g) finger nail clippers for clipping line.
12 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 13

B. Adjusting the Drag
See the reel diagram for your reel to find the drag adjustment.
There are two ways to adjust the drag. One is to tighten the drag
(toward the + sign) until the line can be pulled directly from the reel
with some resistance. (If a friend is helping, have him/her pull line
from the pole, while you hold the pole as if fighting a fish). The other
way is to use a weight that is equal to 1/3 the tensile strength of your
line. Attach the weight to the line as if fishing and adjust the drag until
the weight can just be lifted from the floor with the pole.
C. Holding the Pole
Every pole has a balance point (ful-
crum) with the reel and lure attached (Fig-
ure 11). If the angler holds the pole at this
point, leverage to fight the fish is greater
than when the pole is held behind this
balance point (fulcrum) point. This also allows the angler to place
the end of the pole (butt end) against the
belt to fight larger fish.
Figure 11
D. Retrieving
This is the act of bringing a bait
or lure back to the angler (Figure
12). After casting, live and prepared
bait are often left in one spot until
retrieved. Some baits and most artifi-
cial lures are most effectively pre-
sented while retrieving. The retrieve
can be slow or fast; it can be steady
or erratic.
Figure 12
E. Setting the Hook
Once the fish bites the lure, the hook must be pulled into the fish
to hold the fish. If using barbed hooks, pull hard enough to pull the
barb into the jaw. Then the fish can be brought to the angler (Figure
13). When the fish bites, the fishing rod should be quickly pulled up to
14 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 15

set the hook into the fish. The force needed to set the hook depends
on the rod, line, species of fish, and the lure or bait used. For example,
a crappie caught on a light line and minnows will need only a gentle
lifting of the rod to set
the hook. A bass angler,
fishing with heavier line
and the hook buried in a
plastic worm, will need
a vigorous rod sweep to
force the hook through
the worm and into the
bony mouth of a bass.
F. Playing the Fish
After setting the hook,
the line should be kept
tight so the fish will not
shake the hook loose. The
fishing rod should be held
between a 10 o’clock
and a 12 o’clock position.
Allow the rod to fight the
fish. Properly adjusted
drag will allow the line to Figure 13
release prior to breaking. Large fish must be moved by a pumping ac-
tion; a large fish is repeatedly pulled toward the angler with the rod.
After pulling the rod to the 12 o’clock position to move the fish, reel
in the fishing line to maintain a tight line as the rod is lowered back to
the 10 o’clock position .
Section 4. GOING FISHING
A. Think Safety
When taking a new person fishing, it is important they have an
enjoyable experience. Therefore, find a pond, lake or stream that is
safe and easily fished. As they learn and advance their skills, new chal-
lenges can be introduced; however, always include the safety equip-
ment required for the new situation.
14 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 15

B. Choosing Where to Fish
Some fishing areas are better than others. The quality of fish-
ing depends upon the water’s productivity, the fish species present,
and the size of the fish present. Productive water has more fish than
unproductive water; up to a point, the greener the water is, the more
productive the water. In some waters, undesirable fish compete with
desirable fish. Fishing is better in a lake with a high proportion of the
right size fish. Check the fishing forecast for predicted “hot spots.”
Habitat is the key to fish survival, and fishing near habitat will
result in more bites. Stumps, weed beds, and man-made fish attrac-
tors are all good examples of fish habitat. During summer, fish can be
found near fishing or boating docks, as they prefer shaded areas.
farm ponds
In streams and rivers, anglers focus on riffles, the swift areas that
bring food into the deep, slower portions. Fish congregate in this area
and feed more actively as water begins to rise and carry more food.
Also you should try areas that fish use for resting. Fish rest in areas
where the current is slowed by rocks, trees or in eddies near the swift
water.
Current attracts fish in reservoirs as well as in streams. Current
flow rates are higher under bridges; therefore, bank fishing from
highway bridge approaches or near bridges from a boat can be good.
Safety should be a top priority in these bank areas, including the use
of life jackets.
The areas below dams are called tailwaters. As fish migrate up
river to spawn, they sometimes encounter a dam. Since many fish are
migrating together, fish are concentrated. Fishing can be very good
16 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 17

city lakes
at specific times of the year. Caution should be used in these areas,
including the use of life jackets. If fishing these areas from a boat,
maintain appropriate distance from the discharge areas for safety and
as required by law.
1. Private Waters. Private ponds, streams and rivers are often
excellent places to fish. The permission of the owner is required to fish
water when you are walking on private property. A few simple courte-
streams
16 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 17

tailwaters
sies will help you get invited back.
• If you desire to keep any fish from a stocked pond, ask how many,
what species, and what size fish you may keep.
• Ask the owner if they would like any of your catch.
• Ask before you bring anyone with you.
• Do not litter.
• Close all gates behind you.
• Report any problems immediately to the owner.
2. Public Waters. Larger lakes are normally managed by public
entities such as the Army Corps of Engineers, Tennessee Valley Author-
ity, state wildlife agency or perhaps a power company. Public access
points allow anglers boating and fishing access. For more information
contact the information division of your state fish and wildlife agency.
C. What Fish Live Here?
Most ponds have a combination of large-
mouth bass, bluegill, redear sunfish, and chan-
nel catfish. Larger lakes will have more variety.
Streams and rivers will have many of the na-
tive fishes, plus a few introduced species.
CLICK HERE
Bluegill
for more information
on fish in your state
18 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 19

Smallmouth
Bass
Redear
Sunfish
Largemouth
Bass
Rock Bass
Check the fish
identification
booklet from your
state fish and
wildlife agency to
find the proper
habitat to fish for a
given species.
18 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 19

D. Choosing Bait
Every angler has a favorite bait or lure to catch fish. It works be-
cause that lure is on the line most often. By sharing information with
new anglers, we help them be successful while learning the variety of
fishing techniques.
Live bait simulates food items that fish normally eat. Bait that is
alive and moving after you hook it will catch more fish. Some bait is
available year-round and some is seasonal. See your state’s fish ID
book for ideas on what baits work for which fish.
Meal worm - Insert a size 6 - 8 hook into the
underside of the meal worm (note tiny legs)
near one end. Run the hook inside and bring
the point of the hook out near the opposite
end.
Red worm - Run the hook, usually a size 6 - 8,
through the worm about 1⁄2 inch from one
end. Go through the worm about every inch
leaving 1⁄2 inch wriggling at the other end.
Night crawler - Use larger hooks, such as size 2.
Can either be hooked like a red worm or in one
spot only. To give the worm a natural look, run
the hook inside the worm to hide the shank and
barely bring the point of the hook through the
skin of the worm.
Minnow - Size of hook varies depending on
size of minnow and target fish. Two methods:
1. Run hook through both lips of the minnow.
2. Run hook through the back behind the dor-
sal (top) fin (be careful not to pierce the spine).
Cricket - Use a size 8, long shank hook. Looking
at the back of the cricket, run the point of the
hook under the sheath behind the head. Bring
the point of the hook out behind the sheath.
20 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 21

Artificial lures - If you do
not want to use live bait, you
can select from a variety of
artificial lures.
Section 5. CARING FOR THE CATCH
Before your fishing trip begins, you should plan how you will care
for your catch. The decision to catch and release or keep should be
made before you catch your first fish.
A. Catch and Release
If the decision is to release fish, all fish should be handled as little
as possible and fish should be returned to the water as quickly as pos-
sible. The best method is to hold the fish in the water, reach to the fish
and remove the hook with needle nose pliers (Figure 14). If you need
to remove the fish from the
water, return it as quickly as
possible. In warmer water,
moving the fish back and
forth with water entering
the mouth will help the
fish recover more quickly.
However, in some cases, fish
caught from deep in a lake
(cool water) can not swim
back down to the cool water
due to air bladder expan-
sion. They may not survive
if released in warm surface
water, and anglers should
consider keeping legal fish
rather than releasing them.
Figure 14
20 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 21

B. Catch and Keep.
Anglers who choose to keep and eat the fish they catch should
refer to their state’s annual fishing guide for the latest updates on
creel and size limits plus fish comsumption advisories. By knowing
how many fish you intend to keep and what size (selective release),
you can plan for other equipment. Many fish are kept in floating fish
baskets or on stringers; however these work best in cooler weather.
In warmer water, fish tend to die quickly due to stress from heat and
from being caught. All fish are best when they are kept fresh on ice.
To keep your cooler clean and to keep fish out of the water, use a
plastic bag to isolate your catch.
22 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 23

C. Cleaning Your Catch.
After you leave the water with your catch, you want to properly
prepare it for eating. There are two different ways to clean your catch:
filleting and dressing.
1. Filleting (Figures 15-19) involves cutting the edible part of the fish
away from the inedible part; no bones are left in the edible portion.
2. Dressing (Figures 20-22) implies taking off parts that cannot be
eaten, and most bones are left with the edible portion. Some fish, like
catfish, have a skin that must be removed (Figures 23 and 24). Other
fish have to be scaled with a knife or a spoon (Figure 20).
FILLETING
Figure 15. Filleting fish, such as bass, removes all bones from the
meat. To fillet a bass, place the fish on its side on a firm, flat surface.
Make a cut behind the gill plate from the top of the fish to the belly
and into the flesh to the backbone. Do not cut through the backbone.
22 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 23

Figure 16. Without removing the knife turn the blade toward the
tail, cut through the ribs, and continue on the tail, closely following the
backbone as a guide. Do not cut through the skin completely at the
tail, but leave a half to one inch intact.
Figure 17. Flip the fillet over, skin side down, and insert the blade
between the skin and the meat.
24 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 25

Figure 18. With a sawing motion, follow the inside of the skin
closely with the blade and cut the meat away from the skin.
Figure 19. Cut the ribs away from the skinless fillet. Repeat the
steps for the other side of the fish.
24 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 25

DRESSING
Figure 20. Small fish, such as bream (sunfish), are usually dressed.
Dressing a fish leaves some of the bones in the meat, but less meat is
lost during the cleaning process.
Figure 21. To dress a small fish, place the fish on its side on a firm,
flat surface. Use one hand to hold it in place by the head. Scrape the
scales from the tail toward the head by using a fish scaler, spoon, or
dull knife. Remove the scales on both sides of the body.
26 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 27

Figure 22. Use a fillet knife to cut along both sides of the dorsal fin.
Grasp the dorsal fin and pull forward to remove. Spines should pull
out with fin. Repeat process to remove the anal fin and spines.
Figure 23. Cut off the head immediately behind the gills and remove
the organs. Wash in cold, clean water. The fish is now ready to freeze
or cook.
26 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 27

Figure 24. Some fish,
such as catfish, are
usually skinned. To
skin a catfish, first
remove the spines
to prevent puncture
of a hand or finger.
Cut through the skin
around the head and
pectoral fins. Do not
penetrate the body
cavity.
Figure 25. Using a pair of pliers, pull the skin away from the meat,
working from the head toward the tail. Break or cut the head away
from the backbone and remove the internal organs.
Figure 26. The finished product, ready for the skillet.
28 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 29

D. Final Touches for Fillets
Many fish have a dark strip on the “skin side” of the fillet. This is
what is left of a blood vessel that took blood to the tail. It is also a place
where fat has been stored, and fat is associated with some of the pollut-
ants that accumulate in fish flesh.
Using a fillet knife, lift that fat and
dark area out.
(1) Make a “v-cut” the full length of
the fillet from both sides of the
dark area.
(2) Now lift out the dark meat out,
gently cutting underneath it, and
discard that portion.
Next look on both edges of the fil-
1
let for white or yellow fat. Trim that fat
and your fillet is ready for your fish fry!
Eating fish, even fish from an area
listed in fish advisories, is a choice
you make as an angler. By limiting
your consumption rate, selecting
smaller fish to eat (less time to accu-
mulate pollutants), removing as much
of the potentially polluted flesh (fat) as
possible, and cooking it properly, you
lower your risk dramatically. For more
information on fish advisories, see
2
your state’s fishing guide.
E. Caring for Cleaned Fish.
Once fish are cleaned, they should be washed thoroughly, then
frozen immediately or refrigerated and cooked within three days.
Frozen fish may develop freezer burn unless they are tightly wrapped
or frozen in water. When freezing fish in water, you should use just
enough water to cover them. Plastic freezer bags work well for fillets, if
they can be sealed without leaking.
There are numerous cookbooks that have a variety of recipes and
methods for cooking fish for the table. By trying many different ways of
fixing fish, the angler finds those dishes that best suit individual tastes.
28 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 29

GLOSSARY
bait - usually refers to something natural or live that is used to attract
fish to bite. The terms bait and lure may be used interchangeably.
bite - when a fish tries to take a bait (or lure). Also called a strike.
casting - the skill of propelling a bait or lure into the water.
cleaning - preparing your catch for eating.
conservation - the wise use of natural resources.
creel limit - the number of fish an angler can keep in a day.
dressed - fish prepared for eating complete with bones.
dropper - a separate line tied onto the main line near the hook. It is
used to attach a weight to a separate line or to fish two hooks.
fillet - cleaning a fish by cutting the edible portion from the bones.
fishing line - special flexible fiber; connects fishing reel to the hook.
float, bobber or cork - maintains bait at given depth, indicates bites.
habitat - combination of food, water, shelter and space that attracts
given animal.
land - bringing the fish to the land or to a net for capture.
leader - the piece of line attached to the hook.
lunker - a large specimen of a species of fish.
lure - usually refers to man-made bait used to entice fish to bite.
monofilament - fishing line with a single strand of material.
multifilament - fishing line that is several strands woven together.
playing - process of bringing a fish to the angler so it can be landed.
reel - a device that holds and retrieves fishing line.
retrieving - the act of bringing a bait or lure back to the angler.
rigging - how you hook your bait and where you put your hook, snap
or swivel, weight and float.
30 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 31

rod - a pole with guides that is used to cast a lure or bait.
selective harvest - personal ethics that includes reduced harvest
within established legal size and creel limits.
setting the hook - pulling the rod up sharply when a fish bites.
sinker - used to help cast or help sink the bait or lure; a weight.
slot limit - a limit to protect fish between specified sizes. Usually
extends life of predators or reduces number of small fish.
snap, swivel or snap-swivel - a small metal device tied onto fishing
line; used to quickly attach lures to the line. Keeps line from twisting.
strike - when a fish takes or tries to take a lure (or bait).
structure - any area that causes fish to be concentrated.
tailwater - area below a reservoir.
terminal tackle - placement of tackle at the end of the line.
Notes
30 - BASIC FISHING BASIC FISHING - 31

Ethics
An ethical angler:
• Keeps only the fish needed...
• Does not use illegal live bait...
• Uses only native aquatic species for
bait and does not release aquatic bait...
• Properly disposes of trash and waste,
including old fish line...
• Observes all applicable laws and
regulations...
• Practices safe angling and boating...
• Hones angling and boating skills and
passes knowledge to others...
• Respects the rights of other anglers and
property owners...
• Supports local conservation efforts.
32 - BASIC FISHING