EEmmeerrggeennccyyPPrreeppaarreeddnneessssCChheecckklliisstt__ppgg11..ppddff 1100//1122//22000066 44::4499::5588 PPMM
✓
TORNADO • FLASH FLOOD • EARTHQUAKE • WINTER STORM • HURRICANE • FIRE • HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SPILL
Emergency Preparedness
Checklist
he next time disaster checklist will help you get For additional information
T
strikes, you may not started. Discuss these about how to prepare for
have much time to ideas with your family, then hazards in your commu-
act. Prepare now for
prepare an emergency plan. nity, contact your local
a sudden emergency.
Post the plan where every- emergency management
Learn how to protect your- one will see it—on the or civil defense office
self and cope with disaster refrigerator or bulletin and American Red Cross
by planning ahead. This board. chapter.
Emergency Checklist
C Call Your Emergency ❏ Discuss what to do about power Prepare a Disaster
M outages and personal injuries.
Management Office Supplies Kit
Y ❏
or American Red Cross Draw a floor plan of your home.
Assemble supplies you might need in an
CM Mark two escape routes from each
Chapter evacuation. Store them in an easy-to-carry
MY room. container such as a backpack or duffle bag.
❏ ❏
CY Find out which disasters could Show family members how to turn
Include:
CMY occur in your area. off the water, gas and electricity at
❏
❏ Ask how to prepare for each disaster. main switches when necessary. A supply of water (one gallon per
K
person per day). Store water in
❏ Ask how you would be warned of ❏ Post emergency telephone numbers sealed, unbreakable containers.
an emergency. near telephones. Identify the storage date and replace
❏ Learn your community’s ❏ Teach children how and when to every six months.
evacuation routes. call 911, police and fire. ❏ A supply of non-perishable packaged
❏ Ask about special assistance for ❏ or canned food and a non-electric
Instruct household members to turn
elderly or disabled persons. can opener.
on the radio for emergency information.
❏
A change of clothing, rain gear and
Also... ❏ Pick one out-of-state and one local sturdy shoes.
❏ Ask your workplace about friend or relative for family members ❏ Blankets or sleeping bags.
emergency plans. to call if separated during a disaster ❏
A first aid kit and prescription
❏ (it is often easier to call out-of-state
Learn about emergency plans for medications.
than within the affected area).
your children’s school or day care ❏
An extra pair of glasses.
❏
center. Teach children your out-of-state ❏
A battery-powered radio, flashlight
contact’s phone numbers.
and plenty of extra batteries.
Create an Emergency ❏ Pick two emergency meeting places. ❏ Credit cards and cash.
Plan 1) A place near your home in case ❏
An extra set of car keys.
of a fire. ❏
❏ A list of family physicians.
Meet with household members to 2) A place outside your neighbor-
❏
discuss the dangers of fire, severe hood in case you cannot return A list of important family informa-
weather, earthquakes and other tion; the style and serial number of
home after a disaster.
emergencies. Explain how to medical devices such as pacemakers.
❏
respond to each. Take a basic first aid and CPR class. ❏ Special items for infants, elderly or
❏ Find the safe spots in your home ❏ Keep family records in a water and disabled family members.
for each type of disaster. fire-proof container.

EEmmeerrggeennccyyPPrreeppaarreeddnneessssCChheecckklliisstt__ppgg22..ppddff 1100//1122//22000066 44::5566::5522 PPMM
Emergency Plan Escape Plan
Out-of-State Contact n a fire or other emergency, you
I
may need to evacuate your house,
Name apartment or mobile home on a
moment’s notice. You should be
City ready to get out fast.
Develop an escape plan by drawing a floor
Telephone (Day) (Evening)
plan of your residence. Using a black or blue
pen, show the location of doors, windows,
Local Contact
stairways, and large furniture. Indicate the
location of emergency supplies (Disaster
Name
Supplies Kit), fire extinguishers, smoke
Telephone (Day) (Evening) detectors, collapsible ladders, first aid kits
and utility shut off points. Next, use a
colored pen to draw a broken line charting
Nearest Relative
at least two escape routes from each room.
Finally, mark a place outside of the home
Name
where household members should meet in
City case of fire.
Be sure to include important points outside
Telephone(Day) (Evening)
such as garages, patios, stairways,
elevators, driveways and porches. If your
Family Work Numbers
home has more than two floors, use an
additional sheet of paper. Practice
Father Mother
emergency evacuation drills with all
C household members at least two times
Other
M each year.
Y Emergency Telephone Numbers
CM In a life threatening emergency, dial 911 or the local emergency medical services system number
MY
Police Department
CY Example:
CMY Fire Department
Floor one
K
Hospital
Family Physicians
Name Telephone
Name Telephone
Name Telephone
Reunion Locations
1. Right outside your home
2. Away from the neighborhood, in case you cannot return home
Address
Telephone
Route to try first

EEmmeerrggeennccyyPPrreeppaarreeddnneessssCChheecckklliisstt__ppgg33..ppddff 1100//1122//22000066 44::5599::1199 PPMM
Floor Plan
Floor One
C
M
Y
Floor Two
CM
MY
CY
CMY
K
Normal Exit Route Disaster Supplies Kit Stairways
Emergency Exit Routes Doors Utility Shut Off
Fire Extinguisher Collapsible Ladder Windows
Smoke Detectors Reunion Location (Outside) First Aid Kit

EEmmeerrggeennccyyPPrreeppaarreeddnneessssCChheecckklliisstt__ppgg44..ppddff 1100//1133//22000066 33::3333::2233 PPMM
Home Hazard Hunt ❏ Wear protective clothing and ❏ Maps, Shovel, Flares
In a disaster, ordinary items in the home sturdy shoes. ❏ Tire repair kit and pump
can cause injury and damage. Anything ❏ Take your Disaster Supplies Kit.
Fire Safety
that can move, fall, break or cause a fire ❏
Lock your house. ❏
is a potential hazard. Plan two escape routes out of each
❏
❏ Use travel routes specified by local room.
Repair defective electrical wiring officials.
❏
and leaky gas connections. Practice fire drills at least twice a year.
If you are sure you have time ...
❏ ❏
Fasten shelves securely and brace Teach family members to stay low to
❏
Shut off water, gas and electricity, if
overhead light fixtures. the ground when escaping from a fire.
❏ Place large, heavy objects on lower ❏ instructed to do so. ❏ Teach family members never to open
shelves. Let others know when you left and doors that are hot. In a fire, feel the
❏ where you are going.
Hang pictures and mirrors away bottom of the door with the palm of
❏
from beds. Make arrangements for pets. Animals your hand. If it is hot, do not open
❏ Strap water heater to wall studs. may not be allowed in public shelters. the door. Find another way out.
❏ ❏
Repair cracks in ceilings or Install smoke detectors on every level
Prepare an
foundations. ofyour home. Clean and test them
❏ Store weed killers, pesticides and Emergency Car Kit at least once a month. Change
flammable products away from Include: batteries at least once a year.
heat sources. ❏ Battery powered radio, flashlight and ❏ Keep a whistle in each bedroom to
❏
Place oily polishing rags or waste in extra batteries awaken household in case of fire.
covered metal cans. ❏ ❏
Blanket Check electrical outlets. Do not
❏
Clean and repair chimneys, flue ❏ Booster cables overload outlets.
pipes, vent connectors and gas vents.
❏ Fire extinguisher (5 lb., A-B-C type) ❏ Purchase and learn how to use a fire
C If You Need to Evacuate ❏ extinguisher (5 lb., A-B-C type).
First aid kit and manual
❏
M ❏ ❏ Have a collapsible ladder on each
Listen to a battery powered radio for Bottled water and non-perishable high
upper floor of your house.
Y the location of emergency shelters. energy foods such as granola bars,
❏
Follow instructions of local officials. raisins and peanut butter Consider installing home sprinklers.
CM
MY
CY Information in this brochure was developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Community
and Family Preparedness Program and the American Red Cross Community Disaster Education Program.
CMY
K
www.denver-redcross.org
303.722.7474