A Beginner’s
Guide to Fishing
South Carolina Department of
Natural Resources
Life’s Better Outdoors
www.dnr.sc.gov

Table of Contents Angler Ethics
Angler Ethics ...................................................... 1 What are ethics?
• Rules and values that change your behavior, causing you to do the right thing.
Safety ............................................................... 1
To determine if something is ethical, ask yourself three questions
• Is it legal?
Equipment Overview ........................................... 2 • Would it still be ok if everyone was doing it?
• Would it make you or people who know you proud?
Knot Tying ......................................................... 5
Ethical Anglers:
• Are considerate of one another, respecting other anglers’ space and being quiet so
Rigging ............................................................. 6
as to not disturb others.
• Always leave their fishing area cleaner than when they arrived so as to protect the
Casting ............................................................. 7
resource.
• Abide by all rules and regulations.
Baits & Artificial Lures .......................................... 9 • Practice Catch & Release Fishing
o Use barbless or circle hooks and needlenose pliers or forceps to reduce injury
Fish Anatomy .................................................... 11 and handling time of the fish.
o Land the fish as quickly as possible to minimize the fish’s fighting time.
Rules & Regulations ............................................ 12 o Use wet hands when handling a fish and minimize the time out of water to 20
to 30 seconds.
o When returning a fish back to the water, point the fish into the current or
Invasive Species ................................................. 13
cradle it in your hands loosely under the water until the fish swims away on
its own.
Identifying Good Fishing Spots .............................. 14
o If a fish is landed and the hook has been swallowed, cut the line as far down
in the fish’s mouth as possible.
Setting the Hook ................................................. 15 • Release and handle fish properly
o Sunfish & Small Crappie: comb down the sharp dorsal fin as you slide your
How to Handle Fish .............................................. 15 hand over the back of the fish.
o Bass, Large Crappie/Sunfish: grab by bottom lip, you’ll feel the small
How to Clean Your Catch ...................................... 17 sandpaper-like teeth.
o Catfish & Bullhead: be aware of the dorsal
and pectoral spines which can cause a
References .........................................................17
painful wound. Slide hands up the ventral or
bottom side of the fish under the pectoral
fins or armpit-like area of the fish.
Safety
• Keep at least one rod’s length between you and the next angler before, during and
after you cast.
• Always look behind you and to the side before casting to prevent hooking power
lines, trees, or a person.
• Wear sunglasses, sunscreen, bug spray and other protection from the natural
elements.
• Always be aware of your surroundings and be on the alert for ant mounds and
snakes. Avoid thick grassy areas where you can’t see your feet.
• Be very careful around water and make sure you have a fishing buddy with you. If
fishing from a boat, always wear a life jacket or PFD (personal floatation device).
1
A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing

Rods & Reels
Equipment Overview
• Rod Types
o Cane Pole: a pole with
fishing line tied to it; mainly
Basic Fishing Tackle or Terminal Tackle
used for shoreline fishing.
• Hooks
o Come in a variety of sizes and shapes. Size 1/0 is big to 12, which is very o Spincasting & Baitcasting:
small. For hook sizes 32 to 1, the larger the number the smaller the hook. a rod with small guides
For hook sizes from 1/0 (called one aught) to 19/0 the larger the number the for line to move through
larger the hook size. Popular hook styles: treble, Kirby, octopus, wide gap, on topside of the rod;
O’Shaughness, baitholder, circle and weedless. handle with a finger grip; reel mounts on the topside.
o To determine what hook size to use, picture the species you’d like to catch and
o Spinning: a rod with large
look at its mouth and what they like to eat.
guides for line to move
o Hook anatomy
through that decrease
◊ Point: the sharp end that punctures the fish’s mouth;
in size as they get closer to the rod tip; no finger grip on the handle and reel
there are many different point types such as spear, hollow
mounts on the bottom.
or rolled in.
◊ Barb: extension of the point that projects backwards to o Fly: a rod that is very
keep the fish from unhooking. flexible with guides and
◊ Eye: just like an eye of a needle, the eye of the hook is reel mount on the bottom.
the loop at the top of the hook used to connect the hook
to the line; there are many types of eyes and they can be
• What to Look for in a Rod
positioned in many ways on the shank (up-turned, down-
o Type of rod chosen depends on the fish you plan to catch and the type of bait
turned, straight, ringed or lopped).
or lure you’ll be using.
◊ Bend & Shank: portion that connects point to the eye; the
o Length: a longer rod is better for distance casting and controlling the lure.
hook shank can be straight or have curves, kinks, bends
and offsets which allow for easier setting of the hook, o Action: refers to the portion of the rod at which it bends; measured as slow,
better fly imitation or bait holding. medium, fast:
• Monofilament Line ◊ Fast Action: rod bends mainly near the tip; good for surface
o Like the hooks, the line comes in a variety of weights for lures or detecting subtle strikes when jigging.
different species. ◊ Medium Action: rod bends over the front half or ¾ the way up
o Measured in “pound test” meaning the amount of weight the rod; good for live bait fishing.
required to break the line. 10 pound test line is stronger ◊ Slow Action: rod bends over the entire length or at the
and thicker than 6 pound test line. halfway point; good for absorbing pressure when fighting a big
o When choosing the right pound test, it is always best to fish so as not to break the line.
match the line to the capabilities or size of your rod and reel and to take into o Power: similar to rod action; refers to the amount of force required to bend
account the lures/bait you’re using and the species you want to catch. a rod; measured as light, medium, & heavy or on a scale of 1 to 10 where 1
o Always discard properly or recycle your monofilament line as it can cause is the lightest; light rods easily bend under the weight of a lure so heavy rods
harm to wildlife. are needed for heavy lures.
• Sinkers • Reel Types
o Come in a variety of weights (measured in ounces) and shapes. o Spincast: also known as push button or closed face
o Allow you to cast your bait and take it down to the bottom. reels; easiest reel to use and great for beginners.
o Popular sinker types: bank, pyramid, split shot, egg, bell and o Spinning: also known as an open face reel; line spools off quickly
bullet. casting line farther than a spincast reel; suitable for light lures for
• Bobbers, Corks, or Floats saltwater and freshwater.
o Keep your bait at the depth where the fish are. o Baitcast: most difficult reel to master; line spools during the cast which
o Serve as a strike indicator, letting you know when you’re getting a bite is controlled by the angler’s thumb (if timing isn’t just right, line on the
by bobbing down in a quick jerky motion. reels will backlash and tangle); designed to cast large lures or bait long
o Bobbers come weighted/unweighted and in many different shapes and distances.
sizes. o Fly: primarily used for fly fishing; the reel is only used to hold the line;
casting is done by projecting the line out versus casting with other reels
which project or cast based on the weight of the lure.
2 3
A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing

How to Pack Knot Tying
your Tackle Box • One of the most important steps in fishing is tying knots. Without a strong knot or
a properly tied knot, your fish could get away.
• Knot Tips
o When cinching or tightening down your knot, always wet your line by licking
it. This helps reduce the friction in the line and helps prevent creating weak
Pliers spots.
o When clipping the free end or tag end of your knot, leave about a ¼ inch of
line hanging. Some knots under pressure will slip just a little and leaving the
Nail clippers
extra line will allow the knot to slide but not come undone.
Hook to Line Knots
Hooks (various sizes) o Palomar Knot
1. Double 4 inches of line and pass the loop through the eye of the hook. Let
Bobbers the hook hang loose.
2. Tie an overhand knot in the doubled line (like the first step of tying your
shoes). Don’t twist or tighten the line.
Weights (various sizes & types)
3. Pull the end of the loop down passing it over the hook.
4. Wet the line.
Snap swivels 5. Hold the hook carefully and pull the ends of the line to cinch down or
tighten the knot.
6. Trim the excess line or tag end to leave about ¼ inch of line.
Artificial Lures
1.
Stringer for keeping fish you plan to eat
5.
3.
Measuring tape
2.
4.
6.
Rules & Regulations
o Improved Clinch Knot (also called the fisherman’s knot)
1. Pass the line through the eye of the hook and twist to make 5 to 6 turns.
Fish Identification guide 2. Take the loose or tag end of the line and put it through the loop that
formed at the hook above the eye.
3. Bring the tag end through the second loop that formed by completing
Backup spools of
step 2.
4. Wet the line.
monofilament
5. While holding the line and tag end in separate hands, tighten the knot
slowly so that it moves securely against the eye of the hook.
line 6. Trim the excess line or tag end to leave about ¼ inch of line.
First Aid Kit 2.
1.
Bug Spray 4.
3.
Sunscreen
5. 6.
4 5
A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing

Line to Reel Knot
Casting
o Arbor Knot
1. Loop the line around the reel spool (also called arbor).
2. Tie an overhand knot around the main or standing line to form a loose Spin-casting Technique
slip knot. 1. Grasp the rod’s handle with one hand with
3. Tie a second overhand knot in the free end or tag end. your index finger above the point on the
4. Wet the line. rod handle. Push the reel’s button down
5. Cinch the knot in the tag end tight. with your thumb and HOLD it to keep
6. Trim the excess line. line from coming off the reel. Remember
7. Cinch down the first overhand knot on the reel. a spin-cast or closed face reel will face
upward toward you.
2. Face the area you desire to cast and aim
the rod tip toward the target area about
level with your eyes.
3. Bend your arm at the elbow, raising your hand with
the rod until it reaches about the 10 o’clock position
over your shoulder or until your hand holding the rod
is right to the side of your face.
Rigging
• Rigging refers to the way that you tie together your terminal tackle (hooks, swivels,
sinkers, bobbers, etc.) and bait and/or lures with your line.
• The most popular and most often used rig of all is the bobber rig. This involves
placing a bobber on your line. The depth of the bobber can differ depending on
where and what fish species you are fishing for. Placing the bobber two feet from 4. Bring the rod forward with a smooth motion and
the end of your line is a good place to start after your hook and sinker or split-shot release the button when the rod is at a 12 o’clock
have been attached. The key to the bobber rig is to make sure after you cast, your position.
line is tight so that fish biting at your bait will be noticeable. o If the lure/casting plug landed close in front
• Another easy-to-use rig is a bottom or standard rig. For this rig, just tie on a hook, of you, you released the thumb button too
attach some live bait and enough split shot to sink it to the bottom. Hold your line late. If the lure casting plug went more or
tight as you would if you were fishing a bobber rig, but be careful not to move it. less straight up, you released the thumb
Let the fish come to your bait. If you don’t get a bite after 15 minutes, then reel in button too early. Practice is the key to
and cast again in a new spot. good casting!
6 7
A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing

Spinning Technique
Common Freshwater Live Bait
1. Grasp the rod’s handle with one hand.
Place the connection or stem where the
reel attaches to the rod between your • Worms come in a variety of choices—earthworms, red worms and nightcrawlers.
second and third fingers. Put your pointer Anglers can create their own compost pile or worm bed to house worms for use.
finger or first finger over the line. Then When you purchase worms from the store, leftover worms after your fishing trip
open the reel’s bail (little bar over the can be stored in the refrigerator for a couple of days until the next fishing outing.
reel) with your other hand. Remember a When placing a worm on your hook, make
spinning or open faced reel will face away sure to loop the worm through the hook
from you or below the rod. 2-4 times and to leave some of the worm
dangling from the bottom of the hook. Don’t
leave more than an inch of worm dangling
below the hook or else fish will nibble away
2. Face the area you desire to cast in and
at the worm without biting the hook.
aim the rod tip toward the target area
about level with your eyes. • Crickets and Grasshoppers are excellent bait for
sunfish, bass and catfish. These insects can be
purchased from most local bait and tackle shops
and placed into a specially designed cricket cage.
To prolong the life of your crickets, place a moist
paper towel into the cricket cage. Just be careful
that the paper towel doesn’t aid your crickets
in escaping. To properly bait your hook with a
3. Bend your arm at the elbow, raising your cricket, the hook should be inserted behind the
hand with the rod until it reaches the 10 cricket’s head under the collar.
o’clock position over your shoulder or
• Minnows is a loosely used term by anglers
almost at eye level.
to mean baitfish. Minnows are technically
members of a specific family. Fish used as bait
typically include shiners, chubs and dace as
4. When the rod reaches the almost straight well as minnows. Minnows will live longer in an
up and down or 12 o’clock position, bring aerated minnow bucket where the minnows aren’t crowded. Baiting your hook
your forearm forward with a slight wrist with a minnow involves hooking them through the
movement. lips or under their dorsal fin. Avoid hooking the
fish through the backbone when hooking under
their dorsal fin to prevent killing the minnow.
• Tip: make sure to always present the bait on your hook as natural as possible and
hook your bait in way to keep it alive longer.
5. Straighten your index finger to release
the line when the rod reaches eye level.
o If the lure/casting plug landed close
in front of you, you released your
index finger too late. If the lure/
casting plug went more or less
straight up, you released your index
finger too early. Practice is the
key to good casting!
8 9
A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing

Artificial Lures Fish External Anatomy & Senses
• Plugs were originally lures carved of wood, but now
• The lateral line is a special sensory organ that fish have in addition to the usual
they are made of various materials such as plastic and
senses of seeing, hearing, tasting and smelling. The lateral line is a collection of
cork. Plugs are further separated into different types
nerve endings along a fish’s side that feels vibrations in the water. It helps the fish
such as surface and subsurface plugs. Surface plugs
determine the speed, direction of movement and even the size of the predator
include stickbaits, propbaits, crawlers and chuggers.
or prey thus helping them find food and avoid being eaten. The lateral line is very
Subsurface plugs include crankbaits, minnow plugs,
important to fish that live in deep water or in murky water.
trolling plugs and jerkbaits. Plugs have either two or
three treble hooks attached to • Fish eyesight is similar to ours. They see brightness and color; however, some
cover the fish’s striking area. The species have better color vision than others. Fish that live in deep water don’t see
fish to target with plugs include the full spectrum of colors since water filters out color. Fish can see up to 100 feet
black and white crappie and white, spotted, smallmouth, striped, in extremely clear water and in murky water about 10 to 20 feet out in front of
largemouth and hybrid bass. them. A fish’s field of vision is all directions except for straight down and straight
back. Fish can also see above-water objects so anglers should keep a low profile
• Spinnerbaits have one or more blades that spin or rotate
when approaching fishing spots, especially in clear waters.
around a straight wire or safety pin-looking shaft. Most
spinnerbaits have tails and bodies made of rubber, animal hair, • Fish hear with an inner ear with tiny bones that pick up sound. They lack external
soft plastic, feathers or other materials. The fish to target ears like we have.
with spinnerbaits include all bass species, trout and crappie.
• Fish sense of smell is highly developed. They detect odors by a nasal sac in their
• Soft Plastics are flexible lures made mouth. Water comes in through the nare and is passed through the nasal sac and
into the shapes of what fish eat such as worms, grubs, out again. Smells allow fish to return to spawning grounds and alert them to the
lizards, crayfish and minnows. They are found in a presence of predators or prey.
variety of sizes, colors and some have a fish-attracting
• Taste is a useless sense in most fish, except for catfish and bullheads that have skin
scent. The fish to target with the soft plastics include all
and barbels or whiskers that have taste-sensitive cells. These fish can use their
bass species.
sense of taste to help track down food sources.
• Jigs are made of a weighted metal or lead head with a
body and tail made of rubber, feather, soft plastics or
animal hair. They are found in a variety of sizes, colors
and patterns. The fish Largemouth Bass
to target with these
lures include all bass Dorsal Fin
species, sunfish (such Caudal Fin
Lateral Line
as redbreast, bluegill,
redear, etc.), crappie
and yellow perch.
Eye
• Spoons are metal, spoon-shaped lures made to resemble a swimming or injured
Nares
baitfish. These lures can be used with many techniques such as jigging, rolling
or just casting them out and reeling them in. The fish to target with these lures
include all bass species.
Mouth
• Tip: Always keep in mind the fish you are targeting, what it eats, how big its mouth
is to eat its prey and where they feed (surface, middle or bottom) when choosing
the type of lure and lure size. Gills Anal Fin
Pectoral Fin
Pelvic Fin
10 11
A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing

Why Do We Have Rules & What Are Invasive Or Nuisance
Regulations? Aquatic Species?
• These are species that are non-native and lack natural predators and diseases
• People! Along with natural pressures such as predators and competition for food
to keep their growth in check. Some common, invasive plants in South Carolina
and space, fish have to worry about pressures we put on them. Those pressures
include hydrilla, Didymo algae, water hyacinth, giant salvinia, water primrose,
include pollution, in the forms of litter and runoff which damage water quality and
phragmites and alligatorweed. These plants can grow very dense, covering
cause loss of adequate habitat, and overfishing. Overfishing is the unnecessary
large areas, degrading water quality, displacing native plant species and making
harvest of too many fish or the harvesting of fish that are too small or haven’t had
recreation and boating impossible. Animals can also
the opportunity to breed.
be nuisance species. Species of concern include green
• Management takes place in the form of the following: mussels, zebra mussels, mud snails, flathead catfish,
o daily bag or creel limits on the amount of fish an angler can catch and possess spotted bass, Asian carp and lionfish. The larvae
in a day; (immature form) of animals can be so tiny they are not
o slot or size limits on fish to allow fish to reach sexual maturity and reproduce; and visible to the naked eye. These animal larvae can live in
o restrictions on what type of gear can be used to harvest or catch certain fish— mud, dirt, sand and on plant fragments. To avoid further
game versus non-game. damage from exotic species, anglers should never take
resource management into their own hands. Unplanned
• Frequently Asked Questions about Fishing Regulations stocking of fish, other aquatic animals or plants by
anglers can disrupt the natural balance in an aquatic
o Where do I find all fish and wildlife regulations for the state of South Carolina?
ecosystem causing damage to the established fishery, fish
◊ The Rules and Regulations are available at every location that sells licenses.
habitat and prey base.
They are also found on the website at dnr.sc.gov/regulations.
o At what age do I need to purchase a fishing license?
◊ When you turn 16, you must have a fishing license in order to fish legally in How Can You Help?
public waters.
o How often do I need to renew my fishing license? • When you leave a body of water:
◊ A fishing license is good from July 1st to June 30th.
o Remove any visible mud, plants, fish, or animals before
o Do I need a fishing license to fish from my private property?
transporting equipment. Preventing the occurrence of
◊ Yes, you will need a license to fish in public waters (such as lakes or rivers)
these invasive species can save millions of public and
even if you’re on private land. You don’t need
private dollars in control costs. South Carolina law also
a license to fish on private property in a private
includes fines up to $500 and/or imprisonment for
pond unless you are fishing in a commercial
persons spreading nuisance aquatic weeds.
pay pond. You don’t need a license to fish in
o Eliminate water from equipment before transporting.
a commercial pay pond when the pond is
o Anglers using wading gear should thoroughly clean it after use. They can wait
permitted by DNR.
for the gear to dry 100% and allow it to remain dry for 5 days before using
o Where do I go to buy a license?
again or dip wading gear in a 3% bleach solution, rinse well (as chlorine can
◊ You can visit any of the 700 license
be harmful to gear) and dry thoroughly. To avoid chlorine damage, anglers
agents throughout the state at the
can dip their gear in a 100% vinegar solution for 20 minutes or in a 1% salt
nearest local bait and tackle store, or
solution for 20 minutes.
at a DNR office in Charleston, Clemson,
o Wash all pets that went into the water with warm water, towel dry and brush
Columbia and Florence between 8:30
well.
am-5:00 pm Monday through Friday, or
o Clean and dry anything that comes into contact with water (boats, trailers,
call 1-866-714-3611 7 days a week 24
equipment, clothing, dogs, etc.).
hours a day, or on the web at www.dnr.
o Never release plants, fish, or animals into a body of water unless they came
sc.gov/purchase.
out of that body of water.
o Dispose of bait properly, especially live bait, by placing it in the trash can
within a sealed container or saving live bait in a sealed container for later use.
12 13
A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing

Even if you think your live bait is native, it has the potential to house nuisance
How To Set The Hook
species and disease that can have negative impacts on aquatic ecosystems.
o Dispose of shrimp parts and oyster shells properly. Shrimp heads and shells
need to be disposed of in the trash and not thrown into the water because • When you see signs of a fish biting, move your rod tip from pointing towards the
non-native shrimp parts have the potential to spread disease. Oyster shells water to pointing straight out your belly button and wind up all slack line. Then,
can be taken to a nearby oyster recycling facility. quickly pull the rod back to set the hook. Practice makes perfect when it comes to
o Report aquatic weed problems in public waters to the Aquatic Nuisance learning the timing of setting the hook. The feel of setting the hook will vary based
Program, SCDNR, by calling (803) 755-2836. on the fish species you’re targeting, the lure or bait you’re using and the size of
o Visit www.dnr.sc.gov/water/envaff/aquatic/index.html or www. your rod, reel and line.
protectyourwaters.net to learn more.
• After setting the hook, keep a bend
in your rod and wait for the fish to
Finding Good Fishing Spots
make its move. If the fish is pulling
against the fishing reel, let him simply
• The first thing you need to know about finding a good fishing spot is identifying pull. DO NOT wind in line if the fish is
all the things fish need to live. They need food, oxygen, water, shelter and space. pulling line off your reel. After the fish
Food will vary from fish to fish so know the particular foods the fish you are quits pulling, begin reeling in, keeping
targeting likes. This will also help you determine the type of lure or bait to use. a bend in your rod. Take this process
Fish food can include plants, insects, smaller fish, crayfish and worms. Fish get their slowly.
required amount of oxygen by using their gills. Oxygen in the water changes with
water temperature, movement and the amount of algae present. Oxygen levels How To Handle Or Hold Fish
decrease with warmer temperatures, slow moving
waters and lots of algae. And as you would guess,
• Handling fish properly protects the fish and you. Some fish have sharp fins or teeth
oxygen levels increase with colder temperatures,
that can cut you when not held correctly. Always remember to wet your hands
faster moving water, such as near riffles or waterfalls,
before touching a fish. Wet hands are less likely to damage a fish’s protective
and with less algae present. For shelter, fish need
coating of mucous or slime that protects them from disease. Also, don’t allow your
structures such as rocks, stumps and aquatic plants to
fish to flop around on the bank, dock or the floor of a boat. If you are keeping fish
provide cover to hide from predators or to hide and
to eat, you should put them in ice or in a bucket of cool water.
wait for food to swim by. Fish also need space. Too
many fish using the same resources doesn’t work out • Fish that CAN be held by the bottom lip include crappie, sunfish, bass, perch, catfish
too well. and bullhead. You’ll feel small, dull teeth inside the fish’s mouth somewhat like
sandpaper. For larger bass, catfish and bullhead, support the body of the fish with
• Good fishing spots can be found near aquatic
your other hand once the hook is removed from the fish.
vegetation, brush piles, sand bottoms, rock and gravel bottoms, fallen trees, boat
docks and stumps.
How To Tell A Fish Is Biting
o Crappie o Sunfish
• Fishing with a bobber allows anglers to know when a fish bites. However,
sometimes the movement in the bobbers isn’t so obvious. Sometimes a biting fish
will cause the bobber to twitch only a bit or the bobber will start to move across
the surface of the water. If you are not using a bobber, o Bass o Perch
the best way to tell when a fish is biting is by watching
your line between the rod tip and the water. If your
line moves in a twitching or jumping motion, you are
getting a bite. Sometimes the bite will be hard enough
that you will feel its pull on the rod tip. When fishing o Catfish o Bullhead
without a bobber, you should set the hook or pull on
the rod as soon as you feel that you are getting a bite.
14 15
A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing

Catfish
How To Clean Your Catch
• The common way to hold a catfish is from below the catfish’s belly, gripping the
catfish below both pectoral fins. Be very careful to avoid the fish’s spines that are
• The common catch such as sunfish and bass must first be scaled. To scale a fish,
located in the pectoral fins and the dorsal fin. Hold the fishing line in one hand to
hold it by the tail and scrape from tail to head with a fish scaler, butter knife or
steady the fish and slide your hands from the belly of the fish upward under the
tablespoon. Cut directly behind the gill cover. Remove the head with the innards.
pectoral fins.
Then, slice along each side of the dorsal fin and remove. Cut along both sides of
Blue Catfish the anal fin and remove by pulling it toward the tail. Cut the belly from the area
where the head was removed to the tail and pull out all the remaining innards. If
Dorsal Spine
desired, cut off the tail. Rinse fish quickly and prepare for cooking.
• Catfish and bullheads must be skinned instead of scaled. Your first cut will start
behind the head at the pectoral fin on one side up and over to the other side’s
pectoral fin. Then, slice down the backbone on one side of the dorsal fin and
create another slice on the other side of the dorsal fin to connect the cut just
made. Now, use pliers and pull the skin back from the body of the fish while
holding the head with one hand. After removing the skin from the catfish, cut the
head completely and remove the innards. Prepare for cooking. When filleting a
catfish, make sure to cut away all dark red meat along the lateral line as this meat
often has a strong flavor.
• Filleting
Pectoral Spine
o ALWAYS CUT AWAY FROM YOURSELF!
o Your first cut will be made behind the pectoral fin with the knife angled
Sunfish toward the top of the head, cutting only to the backbone (not all the way
• There are two ways to hold a sunfish. One is from through the fish).
the fish’s belly, loosely gripping the fish between o Next, cut along one side of the backbone with the knife scraping right above
your four fingers and thumb across the fish’s side. the rib bones without cutting them all the way to the tail. The knife should
The other is from the top of the fish’s body over its come out right at the base of the tail.
dorsal fin. Be very careful of the dorsal fin, it has o Lift the piece of meat from the bones.
very sharp bones that can hurt you. o Turn the fish over and repeat on the other side.
o If desired, the skin can be removed from the fish by holding the tail with your
Perch
fingertips and cutting between the flesh and skin with a sawing motion. Rinse
• Perch should be held under the belly
the meat quickly in cold water and prepare for cooking.
underneath the pectoral fins loosely
between your four fingers and thumb across
References
the fish’s side. Be very careful of this fish’s
gill covers because they are very sharp.
Maas, Dave. Kids Gone Fishin. Minnesota: Creative Publishing International Inc., 2001.
Maas, Dave, et al. The Complete Guide to Freshwater Fishing. Creative Publishing
International Inc., 2002.
Texas State. Texas Parks & Wildlife. A Basic Guide for the Beginning Angler. 2008.
A special thanks goes to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department for the use of their
artwork.
16 17
A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing A Beginner’s Guide to Fishing

Total cost $3,577.00
Total copies 12,000
08CE6396 Printed on recycled paper. Cost per copy .30
Equal opportunity to participate in and benefit from the programs and activities of the South Carolina Department of
Natural Resources is available to all individuals regardless of age, race, religion, color, sex, national origin, disability,
sexual orientation, status as a parent, and protected genetic information. Please direct any questions to the SCDNR, Chief
of Staff, 1000 Assembly Street, Columbia, SC 29201; 803-734-3672 or the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Office of
Diversity and Civil Rights, 1875 Century Boulevard, NE, Atlanta, GA 30345; 404-679-7080/7148.