FM 21-75
3 August 1984
ii

FIELD MANUAL * FM 21-75
No. 21-75
HEADQUARTERS
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
Washington, DC, 3 August 1984
Combat Skills of the Soldier
Preface
This manual is dedicated to the soldier — the key to success on the battle-
field. Wars are not won by machines and weapons but by the soldiers who
use them. Even the best equipped army cannot win without motivated and
well-trained soldiers. If the US Army is to win the next war, its soldiers must
be motivated by inspired leadership, and they must know how to do their jobs
and survive on the battlefield.
This is the soldier’s field manual. It tells the soldier how to perform the
combat skills needed to survive on the battlefield. These are basic skills that
must be learned by soldiers in all military occupational specialties (MOS).
Users of this manual may submit recommended changes or comments,
referring to the page and line(s) of the text. Reasons should be provided to
insure understanding and complete evaluation. Comments should be forwarded
on DA Form 2028 (Recommended Changes to Publications) addressed to the
Commandant, US Army Infantry School, ATTN: ATSH-I-V-PD, Fort Benning,
GA 31905.
The words “he,” “him,” “his,” “man,” and “men,” when used in this
publication, represent both the masculine and feminine genders, unless other-
wise specifically stated.
* This manual supersedes FM 21-75, 10 July 1967.
i

FM 21-75
CHAPTER 1
Cover, Concealment, and Camouflage
GENERAL
If the enemy can see you, he can hit you with
his fire. So you must be concealed from enemy
observation and have cover from enemy fire.
When the terrain does not provide natural cover
and concealment, you must prepare your cover and
use natural and man-made materials to camouflage
yourself, your equipment, and your position. This
chapter provides guidance on the preparation and
use of cover, concealment, and camouflage.
CONTENTS
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1-1
COVER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1-2
CONCEALMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1-3
CAMOUFLAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1-3
1-1

FM 21-75
COVER
Cover gives protection from bullets, frag-
ments of exploding rounds, flame, nuclear
effects, and biological and chemical agents.
Cover can also conceal you from enemy observa-
tion. Cover can be natural or man-made.
To get protection from enemy fire in the
offense or when moving, use routes that put
cover between you and the places where the
enemy is known or thought to be. Use ravines,
gullies, hills, wooded areas, walls, and other
cover to keep the enemy from seeing and firing
at you. Avoid open areas, and do not skyline
yourself on hilltops and ridges.
Natural cover includes such things as
logs, trees, stumps, ravines, and hollows. Man-
made cover includes such things as fighting
positions, trenches, walls, rubble, and craters.
Even the smallest depression or fold in the
ground can give some cover. Look for and use
every bit of cover the terrain offers.
In combat, you need protection from
enemy direct and indirect fire.
To get this protection in the defense, build
a fighting position (man-made cover) to add to
the natural cover afforded by the terrain.
1-2

FM 21-75
CONCEALMENT is such things as not moving about fighting
Concealment is anything that hides you positions unless necessary, and not moving on
from enemy observation. Concealment does routes that lack cover and concealment. In the
not protect you from enemy fire. Do not think defense, build a well-camouflaged fighting posi-
that you are protected from the enemy’s fire tion and avoid moving about. In the offense,
just because you are concealed. Concealment, conceal yourself and your equipment with
like cover, can also be natural or man-made. camouflage and move in woods or on terrain
Natural concealment includes such things that gives concealment. Darkness cannot hide
as bushes, grass, trees, and shadows. If possible, you from enemy observation in either offense
natural concealment should not be disturbed. or defense. The enemy’s night vision devices
Man-made concealment includes such things and other detection means let them find you in
as battle-dress uniforms, camouflage nets, face both daylight and darkness.
paint, and natural material that has been moved
from its original location. Man-made conceal- CAMOUFLAGE
ment must blend into the natural concealment
provided by the terrain. Camouflage is anything you use to keep
yourself, your equipment, and your position
from looking like what they are. Both natural
and man-made material can be used for
camouflage.
Change and improve your camouflage
often. The time between changes and improve-
ments depends on the weather and on the
material used. Natural camouflage will often
die, fade, or otherwise lose its effectiveness.
Likewise, man-made camouflage may wear off
or fade. When those things happen, you and
your equipment or position may not blend with
the surroundings. That may make it easy for
the enemy to spot you.
CAMOUFLAGE CONSIDERATIONS
Light discipline, noise discipline, move- Movement draws attention. When you
ment discipline, and the use of camouflage give arm-and-hand signals or walk about your
contribute to concealment. Light discipline is position, your movement can be seen by the
controlling the use of lights at night by such naked eye at long ranges. In the defense, stay
things as not smoking in the open, not walking low and move only when necessary. In the
around with a flashlight on, and not using offense, move only on covered and concealed
vehicle headlights. Noise discipline is taking routes.
action to deflect sounds generated by your unit Positions must not be where the enemy
(such as operating equipment) away from the expects to find them. Build positions on the
enemy and, when possible, using methods to side of a hill, away from road junctions or lone
communicate that do not generate sounds buildings, and in covered and concealed places.
(arm-and-hand signals). Movement discipline Avoid open areas.
1-3

FM 21-75
Outlines and shadows may reveal your can be reflected light from polished surfaces
position or equipment to air or ground ob- such as shiny mess gear, a worn helmet, a wind-
servers. Outlines and shadows can be broken shield, a watch crystal and band, or exposed
up with camouflage. When moving, stay in the skin. A light, or its reflection, from a position
shadows when possible. may help the enemy detect the position. To
reduce shine, cover your skin with clothing and
face paint. However, in a nuclear attack, darkly
painted skin can absorb more thermal energy
and may burn more readily than bare skin. Also,
dull the surfaces of equipment and vehicles
with paint, mud, or some type of camouflage
material.
Shine may also attract the enemy’s at-
tention. In the dark, it may be a light such as a
burning cigarette or flashlight. In daylight, it
1-4

FM 21-75
Shape is outline or form. The shape of a
helmet is easily recognized. A human body is
also easily recognized. Use camouflage and
concealment to breakup shapes and blend them
with their surroundings. Be careful not to
overdo it.
The colors of your skin, uniform, and
equipment may help the enemy detect you if
the colors contrast with the background. For
example, a green uniform will contrast with
snow-covered terrain. Camouflage yourself and
your equipment to blend with the surroundings.
1-5

FM 21-75
Dispersion is the spreading of men, vehi-
cles, and equipment over a wide area. It is
usually easier for the enemy to detect soldiers
when they are bunched. So, spread out. The
distance between you and your fellow soldier
will vary with the terrain, degree of visibility,
and enemy situation. Distances will normally
be set by unit leaders or by a unit’s standing
operating procedure (SOP).
1-6

FM 21-75
HOW TO CAMOUFLAGE
Before camouflaging, study the terrain
and vegetation of the area in which you are
operating. Then pick and use the camouflage
material that best blends with that area. When
moving from one area to another, change camou-
flage as needed to blend with the surroundings.
Take grass, leaves, brush, and other material
from your location and apply it to your uniform
and equipment and put face paint on your skin.
1-7

FM 21-75
Fighting Positions. When building a fighting
position, camouflage it and the dirt taken from
it. Camouflage the dirt used as frontal, flank,
rear, and overhead cover. Also camouflage the
bottom of the hole to prevent detection from
the air. If necessary, take excess dirt away
from the position (to the rear).
Do not overcamouflage. Too much camou-
flage material may actually disclose a position.
Get your camouflage material from a wide area.
An area stripped of all or most of its vegetation
may draw attention. Do not wait until the posi-
tion is complete to camouflage it. Camouflage
the position as you build. -
Do not leave shiny or light-colored objects
lying about. Hide mess kits, mirrors, food con-
tainers, and white underwear and towels. Do
not remove your shirt in the open. Your skin
may shine and be seen. Never use fires where
there is a chance that the flame will be seen or
the smoke will be smelled by the enemy. Also,
cover up tracks and other signs of movement.
1-8

FM 21-75
When camouflage is complete, inspect the
position from the enemy’s side. This should
be done from about 35 meters forward of the
position. Then check the camouflage periodi-
cally to see that it stays natural-looking and
conceals the position. When the camouflage
becomes ineffective, change and improve it.
Helmets. Camouflage your helmet with the
issue helmet cover or make a cover of cloth or
burlap that is colored to blend with the terrain.
The cover should fit loosely with the flaps folded
under the helmet or left hanging. The hanging
flaps may break up the helmet outline. Leaves, Uniforms. Most uniforms come already camou-
grass, or sticks can also be attached to the flaged. However, it may be necessary to add
cover. Use camouflage bands, strings, burlap more camouflage to make the uniform blend
strips, or rubber bands to hold those in place. better with the surroundings. To do this, put
If there is no material for a helmet cover, dis- mud on the uniform or attach leaves, grass, or
guise and dull helmet surface with irregular small branches to it. Too much camouflage,
patterns of paint or mud. however, may draw attention.
1-9

FM 21-75
When operating on snow-covered ground, Skin. Exposed skin reflects light and may
wear overwhites (if issued) to help blend with draw the enemy’s attention. Even very dark
the snow. If overwhites are not issued, use skin, because of its natural oil, will reflect light.
white cloth, such as white bedsheets, to get the Use the following methods when applying
same effect. camouflage face paint to camouflage the skin.
When applying camouflage stick to your paint the exposed skin on the back of the neck,
skin, work with a buddy (in pairs) and help each arms, and hands. Palms of hands are not nor-
other. Apply a two-color combination of camou- mally camouflaged if arm-and-hand signals are
flage stick in an irregular pattern. Paint shiny to be used. Remove all jewelry to further reduce
areas (forehead, cheekbones, nose, ears, and shine or reflection.
chin) with a dark color. Paint shadow areas When camouflage sticks are not issued,
(around the eyes, under the nose, and under the use burnt cork, bark, charcoal, lamp black, or
chin) with a light color. In addition to the face, light-colored mud.
1-10

FM 21-75
CHAPTER 2
Fighting Positions
GENERAL
When defending, or when temporarily halted
while making an attack, you must seek cover from
fire and concealment from observation. Cover and
concealment are best provided by some type of fight-
ing position. This may be an existing hole, a hastily
dug prone shelter, or a well-prepared position with
overhead cover. The time available for preparation
determines how well you build your position.
Your fighting position must:
Allow you to fire.
Protect you from observation and
direct and indirect fire.
CONTENTS
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1
COVER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-2
CONCEALMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-5
SECTORS AND FIELDS
OF FIRE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .2-5
HOW TO BUILD
FIGHTING POSITIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-8
2-1

FM 21-75
COVER
The cover of your fighting position must
be strong enough to protect you from small
arms fire, indirect fire fragments, and the blast
wave of nuclear explosions. The position should
have frontal cover to give protection from small
arms fire from the front. Natural frontal cover
(trees, rocks, logs, and rubble) is best, because
it is hard for the enemy to detect a position that
is concealed by natural cover. If natural cover
is not available, use the dirt taken from the hole
you dig to build additional cover. The cover can
be improved by putting the dirt in sandbags
and then wetting them.
Frontal cover must be:
Thick enough (at least 46 cm [18 in]
of dirt) to stop small arms fire.
High enough to protect your head
when you fire from behind the cover.
Far enough in front of the hole to allow
room for elbow holes and sector stakes
so that you can fire to the oblique.
Long enough to give you cover and
hide the muzzle blast of your rifle
when you fire to the oblique.
2-2

FM 21-75
Your fighting position should be built so
that, when you come under direct fire from your
front, you can move behind the frontal cover
for protection and yet fire to the oblique.
2-3

FM 21-75
For all-round protection, to include pro- bottom of the position is scattered
tection from a nuclear attack, your position into the position through the opening.
should also have overhead, flank, and rear
cover. The dirt from the hole can also be used Deeper fighting positions place a
to build that cover, which protects against greater thickness of shielding material
indirect fire that bursts overhead or to the or earth between you and the nuclear
flanks and rear of the position. Cover also detonation therefore, deep positions
guards against the effects of friendly weapons provide greater reduction of initial
supporting from the rear, such as small arms radiation entering the hole. Radiation
fire or discarding sabot rounds fired from tanks. is reduced by a factor of two for each
You should leave crawl spaces in the rear cover. 16 inches of hole depth.
This lets you enter and leave the position
without exposing yourself to the enemy. Low body positions put more dirt be-
To increase your chances of survival in a tween you and the source of radiation.
nuclear attack, you should insure that your Curling upon your side or, better yet,
fighting position incorporates the following lying on your back with knees drawn
considerations: up to the chest is best. Tucked-up legs
and arms tend to shield the body from
radiation.
Rounded walls hold up better against
a blast wave than square or rectangu- Thermal radiation enters your fighting
lar walls, and rounded walls are easier position by line of sight or by reflec-
to dig. tion off the sides. Dark and rough
materials (such as wool blankets and
Small openings help keep out radia- shelter halves) can be used to cover
tion. Most nuclear radiation in the potential reflecting surfaces.
2-4

FM 21-75
CONCEALMENT Camouflage material that does not have
If your position can be detected, it can be to be replaced (rocks, logs, live bushes, and
hit by enemy fire. If it can be hit, you can be grass) is best. You should not use so much
killed in it. Therefore, your position must be so camouflage that your position looks different
well hidden that the enemy will have a hard time from its surroundings.
detecting it even after he is in hand-grenade
Your position must be concealed from
range.
enemy aircraft as well as from ground troops.
Natural, undisturbed concealment is better If the position is under a bush or tree, or in a
than man-made concealment because: building, it is less likely to be seen from above.
Leaves, straw, or grass placed on the floor of
It is already prepared. the hole will keep the fresh earth from con-
trasting with the ground around it. Do not use
It usually will not attract the enemy’s sticks, as they may stop grenades from rolling—
attention. into the grenade sumps.
It need not be replaced.
While digging your position, try not to
disturb the natural concealment around it. Put
the unused dirt from the hole behind the posi-
tion and camouflage it.
Man-made concealment must blend with
its surroundings so that it cannot be detected.
SECTORS AND FIELDS OF FIRE
The sectors of fire are those areas into
which you must observe and fire. When your
leader assigns you a fighting position, he should
also assign you a primary and a secondary
sector of fire. The primary sector of fire is to
the oblique of your position, and the secondary
sector of fire is to the front.
2-5

FM 21-75
To be able to see and fire into your sectors Cut off lower branches of large, scat-
of fire, you may have to clear some vegetation tered trees in sparsely wooded areas.
and other obstructions from them. That is called
Clear underbrush only where it blocks
clearing a field of fire.
your view.
When clearing a field of fire: Remove cut brush, limbs, and weeds
so the enemy will not spot them.
Do not disclose your position by care-
Cover cuts on trees and bushes for-
less or too much clearing.
ward of your position with mud, dirt,
or snow.
Leave a thin, natural screen of vege-
tation to hide your position. Leave no trails as clues for the enemy.
2-6

FM 21-75
A field of fire to the front is needed out to
the range of your weapon.
A field of fire to the oblique lets you hit fired to the oblique, your fire interlocks with
the attackers from an unexpected angle. It also the fire of other positions. That helps create a
lets you support the positions next to you. When wall of fire that the enemy must pass through.
2-7

FM 21-75
HOW TO BUILD
FIGHTING POSITIONS
HASTY FIGHTING POSITION
When there is little time for preparation,
build a hasty fighting position. It should be
behind whatever cover is available. It should
give frontal cover from enemy direct fire but
allow firing to the front and the oblique. The
term hasty does not mean that there is no
digging.
If there is a natural hole or ditch available,
use it. If not, dig a prone shelter that will give
some protection. The hole should be about
one-half meter (18 to 20 in) deep. Use the dirt
from the hole to build cover around the edge of
the position.
TWO-MAN FIGHTING POSITION
In the defense, you and another soldier
will build a two-man fighting position. Improve
your position as time permits.
2-8

FM 21-75
Keep the hole small. The smaller the hole,
the less likely it is that rounds, grenades, or
airburst fragments will get into it. It should be
large enough for you and your buddy in full
combat gear. It should extend beyond the edges
of the frontal cover enough to let you and your
buddy observe and fire to the front. The hole
is usually dug straight, but it may be curved
around the frontal cover.
Curving the hole around the frontal cover
may be necessary in close terrain to allow better
observation and fire to the front and to the next
flank position. To curve the hole, simply extend
one or both ends of it around the frontal cover.
A curved hole lets one of you watch for
the enemy to the front while the other sleeps or
eats. Also, you can observe and fire to the front
when not being fired at, and move back behind
the frontal cover when under heavy fire.
2-9

FM 21-75
On a steep slope, a straight hole may at attackers. You may have to stand up and
not let you stay behind frontal cover and fire expose yourself to the attackers’ fire.
2-10

FM 21-75
To avoid such exposure, dig firing ports
in each end of the hole. The ground between the
firing ports will then be additional frontal cover.
Dig the hole armpit deep. This lowers
your profile and still lets you fire. Other dimen-
sions should be the length of two M16s and the
width of two bayonets.
2-11

FM 21-75
Leave enough distance between the hole can put your elbows when firing.
and the frontal cover to make a shelf where you
If you or your buddy has an automatic
Dig elbow holes to keep your elbows from
rifle, dig a small trench to stabilize its bipod
moving around when you fire. Your fire will
legs.
then be more accurate.
2-12

FM 21-75
Hammer in sector stakes (right and left)
to define your sectors of fire. Sector stakes pre-
vent accidental firing into friendly positions.
Tree limbs about 46 cm (18 in) long make good
stakes. The stakes must be sturdy and must
stick out of the ground high enough to keep
your rifle from being pointed out of your sector.
Hammer in aiming stakes to help you fire
into dangerous approaches at night and at other
times when visibility is poor. Forked tree limbs
about 30 cm (12 in) long make good stakes. Put
one stake near the edge of the hole to rest the
stock of your rifle on. Then put another stake
forward of the rear (first) stake toward each
dangerous approach. The forward stakes are
used to hold the rifle barrel. To change the direc-
tion of your fire from one approach to another,
move the rifle barrel from one forward stake
to another. Leave the stock of the rifle on the
rear stake.
2-13

FM 21-75
Dig two grenade sumps in the floor (one Build overhead cover for protection
on each end). If the enemy throws a grenade into against airburst fragments. Build the overhead
the hole, kick or throw it into one of the sumps. cover either across the center of the hole or off
The sump will absorb most of the blast. The to its flanks.
rest of the blast will be directed straight up
and out of the hole. Dig the grenade sumps:
As wide as the entrenching tool blade.
At least as deep as an entrenching
tool.
As long as the position floor is wide.
For water drainage, slope the floor of the
hole toward the grenade sumps. This may. also
cause grenades to roll into the sumps.
2-14

FM 21-75
When center overhead cover would not the frontal and rear cover.
make a position easy to detect, build it. Put Put logs 10 to 15 cm (4 to 6 in) in diameter
support logs 10 to 15 cm (4 to 6 in) in diameter side by side across the support logs as the base
on top of each other along the entire length of for the overhead cover.
Put a water-repellent layer, such as This helps keep water from leaking through
C-ration boxes or a poncho, over the base logs. the overhead cover.
2-15

FM 21-75
Then put 15 to 20 cm (6 to 8 in) of dirt
on top of the waterproofing material. Finally,
mold and camouflage the cover to blend with
the terrain.
When center overhead cover would make
your position easy to detect, build flank over-
head cover. That method gives both you and
your buddy your own overhead cover. However,
neither of you can observe or fire into your
sectors of fire while under it.
When flank overhead cover is used, dig
only one grenade sump. Dig it in the center of
the floor against the back wall and slope the
floor toward it.
2-16

FM 21-75
Dig out an area for flank overhead cover
at each end of the position:
About 30 cm (12 in) deep.
Long enough to extend about 45 cm
(18 in) beyond both sides of the hole.
About 1 meter (3 ft) wide.
Save the sod for camouflage.
Next, place support logs, about 10 to
15 cm (4 to 6 in) in diameter, across the dug-out
holes. This will support the rest of the overhead
cover material. Put a water-repellent layer, such
as C-ration boxes or a poncho, over the support
logs. This helps keep water from leaking through
the overhead cover.
2-17

FM 21-75
Then put 15 to 20 cm (6 to 8 in) of dirt on
top of the waterproofing material. Cover the
dirt with the sod and camouflage it.
Then get in the hole and dig out a cave-like
compartment at each end of the position under
the overhead cover. Dig your compartment
large enough for you and your equipment. Dig
your buddy’s compartment large enough for
him and his equipment.
2-18

FM 21-75
In sandy or loose soil, the sides of your
position may require revetments to keep them
from collapsing. Use such things as mesh wire,
boards, or logs for revetting. Tie anchor string,
rope, or wire to the revetting material and
stake them down. Drive the stakes into the
ground. This hides them and keeps them from
being mistaken for aiming stakes or sector
stakes.
ONE-MAN FIGHTING POSITION
Sometimes you may have to build and
occupy a one-man fighting position. Except for
its size, a one-man position is built the same
way as a two-man fighting position. The hole
2-19

FM 21-75
of a one-man position is only large enough for
you and your equipment.
MACHINE GUN FIGHTING POSITION
If you are in a machine gun crew, you and
the other members must build a machine gun
fighting position. However, before you can start
work on the position, your leader must:
Position the machine gun.
Assign it a primary (and a secondary,
if required) sector of fire.
Assign it a principal direction of fire
(PDF) or final protective line (FPL).
NOTE: The FPL is a line on which the gun
fires grazing fire across the unit’s front.
Grazing fire is fired 1 meter above the
ground. When an FPL is not assigned, a
PDF is. A PDF is a direction toward which
the gun must be pointed when not firing
at targets in other parts of its sector.
2-20

FM 21-75
The first thing to do when building a with sector stakes, and trace the outline of the
machine gun position is to mark the position of hole and its frontal cover on the ground.
the tripod legs. Then mark the sectors of fire
For an M60 machine gun position, dig secondary sector of fire side of the position,
two firing platforms for the gun. One platform and the machine gun biped is used when firing
is on the primary sector of fire side of the posi- on this platform. A trench must be dug for the
tion, and the machine gun tripod is used on bipod legs.
this platform. The other platform is on the
2-21
161-017 0 - 94 - 2

FM 21-75
.
The firing platforms reduce the profile of
the gunner. They also reduce the height of the
frontal cover needed. The firing platforms must
not, however, be so low that the gun cannot be
traversed across its sector of fire.
In some cases, the floor of the platforms
may need to be lined with sandbags. Also,
sandbags may be needed on each tripod leg to
keep it from moving.
After the firing platforms have been dug,
prepare your range card (app I) and then dig
your hole. Dig the hole in the shape of an in-
verted T. The top of the T, however, must be
longer than the shaft of the T. Dig the hole
deep enough to, protect the crew and still let
the gunner fire the machine gun (usually about
armpit deep). Use the dirt from the hole to build
frontal, flank, and rear cover. The frontal cover
is built first. When the frontal cover is high
and thick enough, use the rest of the dirt to
build flank and rear cover.
Dig three grenade sumps, one at each end
of the T. Dig the grenade sumps like those in a
two-man fighting position.
2-22

FM 21-75
Build the overhead cover for the position
like that for a two-man fighting position.
When an M60 machine gun has only one
sector of fire, dig only half of the position (only
one firing platform).
2-23

FM 21-75
When there is a three-man crew for an
M60 machine gun, the third man (the ammunit-
ion bearer) digs a one-man fighting position.
Usually, his position is on the same side of the
machine gun as its FPL or PDF. From that posi-
tion, he can observe and fire into the machine
gun’s secondary sector and, at the same time,
see the gunner and assistant gunner. The
ammunition bearer’s position is connected to
the machine gun position by a crawl trench so
that he can bring ammunition to the gun or
replace the gunner or the assistant gunner.
In a caliber .50 machine gun position, dig
only one firing platform for the gun. Dig the
platform below ground level, like that for an
M60 machine gun except deeper. Because of
the gun’s vibrations, you may have to line the
floor of the platform with sandbags. Sandbags
may also be needed on each tripod leg to keep it
from moving. Also, the walls of the platform
may need revetments.
2-24

FM 21-75
After digging the platform, prepare your the machine gun (usually about armpit deep).
range card and then dig your hole. The hole Use the dirt from the hole to build frontal,
should be the shape of an L, with the platform flank, and rear cover. Build the frontal cover
in the center of the L. Dig the hole deep enough first. When that is completed, use the rest of
to protect the crew and still let the gunner fire the dirt to build flank and rear cover.
Dig two grenade sumps, one at both Build the overhead cover like that for a
ends of the L, like those in a two-man fighting two-man fighting position.
position.
2-25

FM 21-75
DRAGON FIGHTING POSITION
The Dragon can be fired from either
a one-man or a two-man fighting position.
However, you must make some changes in the
positions. Like the machine gun, a Dragon
needs a range card. Prepare it before digging
your hole.
Dig the hole wide enough to let the muzzle
end of the launcher extend 15 cm (6 in) beyond
the front of the hole and the rear of the launcher
extend out over the rear of the hole. This is to
keep the backblast out of the hole.
Dig the hole only waist deep on the side
the Dragon will be fired from. This lets you
move while tracking. Dig the other side of the
hole armpit deep. Also, dig a small hole for
the biped legs in front of the hole. Because of
your height above the ground when firing the
Dragon, build frontal cover high enough to hide
you and, if feasible, the backblast.
2-26

FM 21-75
Build overhead cover on the flanks of the
position. Build it large enough for you, your
equipment, and the Dragon. Overhead cover is
not usually built across the center of the hole in
a Dragon position. The center overhead cover
would have to be so high that it would be easy
for the enemy to spot.
Clear the backblast area before firing the
weapon. That means checking to see if any
soldiers are in the backblast area or if any
walls, large trees, or other things are in a posi-
tion to deflect the backblast. If the weapon is
to be fired from a two-man fighting position,
make sure that the other soldier in the hole is
not in the backblast area.
2-27

FM 21-75
90-MM RECOILLESS RIFLE
FIGHTING POSITION
Build a 90-mm recoilless rifle (RCLR)
position like a Dragon position, but dig the hole
a little longer when firing to the right side of
the frontal cover. That lets the assistant gunner
work from the right side of the RCLR. Prepare
your range card before digging the hole. Also,
clear the backblast area before firing the RCLR.
2-28

FM 21-75
LIGHT ANTITANK WEAPON (M72A2)
AND FLAME ASSAULT
SHOULDER WEAPON (FLASH)
FIGHTING POSITION
There is no special fighting position for
the M72A2 or FLASH. They can be fired from
any fighting position. Before firing any of
these weapons, clear the backblast area.
2-29

FM 21-75
TRENCHES
When there is time, dig trenches to connect
fighting positions. Trenches provide covered
routes between positions. The depth of the
trenches depends on the time and type of help
and equipment available to dig them. Without
engineer help, crawl trenches about 1 meter
(3 feet) deep and two thirds of a meter (2 feet)
wide are probably all that can be dug. Dig the
trenches zigzagged so that the enemy will not
be able to fire down a long section if he gets
into the trench, and so that shrapnel from shell
bursts will lose some of its effectiveness.
2-30

FM 21-75
STORAGE COMPARTMENTS
A fighting position should have a place for the back wall. The size of the compartment
storing equipment and ammunition. When your depends on the amount of equipment and
position has overhead cover across its center, ammunition to be stored.
dig a storage compartment in the bottom of
When your position has flanked overhead head cover as storage compartments.
cover, use the compartments dug for the over-
If you dig your storage compartment large you can stretch out while sleeping. This lets
enough, it may provide extra space in which you sleep inside the position and under cover.
2-31

FM 21-75
CHAPTER 3
Movement
GENERAL
Normally, you will spend more time moving than
fighting. You must use proper movement techniques
to avoid contact with the enemy when you are not
prepared for contact.
The fundamentals of movement discussed in this
chapter provide techniques that all soldiers should
learn. These techniques should be practiced until
they become second nature.
CONTENTS
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-1
MOVEMENT TECHNIQUES . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-2
IMMEDIATE ACTIONS
WHILE MOVING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-5
MOVING WITHIN A TEAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-8
FIRE AND MOVEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-9
MOVING WITH TANKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-10
3-1

FM 21-75
MOVEMENT TECHNIQUES
Your unit’s ability to move depends on Avoid cleared, open areas and tops of
your movement skills and those of your fellow hills and ridges.
soldiers. Use the following techniques to avoid
being seen or heard by the enemy: METHODS OF MOVEMENT
In addition to walking, you may move in
Camouflage yourself and your equip-
one of three other methods — low crawl, high
ment.
crawl, or rush.
Tape your dog tags together and to
the chain so they cannot slide or rattle.
Tape or pad the parts of your weapon
and equipment that rattle or are so
loose that they may snag (the tape or
padding must not interfere with the
operation of the weapon or equip-
ment). Jump up and down and listen
for rattles.
Wear soft, well-fitting clothes.
Do not carry unnecessary equipment.
Move from covered position to revered
position (taking no longer than 3 to 5
seconds between positions).
Stop, look, and listen before moving.
Look for your next position before
leaving a position.
Look for covered and concealed routes
on which to move.
Change direction slightly from time to
time when moving through tall grass.
Stop, look, and listen when birds or
animals are alarmed (the enemy may
be nearby).
Use battlefield noises, such as weapon
noises, to conceal movement noises.
Cross roads and trails at places that
have the most cover and concealment
(large culverts, low spots, curves, or
bridges).
Avoid steep slopes and places with The low crawl gives you the lowest silhou-
loose dirt or stones. ette. Use it to cross places where the conceal-
3-2

FM 21-75
ment is very low and enemy fire or observation To move, alternately advance your right
prevents you from getting up. Keep your body elbow and left knee, then your left elbow and
flat against the ground. With your firing hand, right knee.
grasp your weapon sling at the upper sling— The rush is the fastest way to move from
swivel. Let the front handguard rest on your one position to another. Each rush should last
forearm (keeping the muzzle off the ground), from 3 to 5 seconds. The rushes are kept short
and let the weapon butt drag on the ground. to keep enemy machine gunners or riflemen
To move, push your arms forward and pull from tracking you. However, do not stop and hit
your firing side leg forward. Then pull with your the ground in the open just because 5 seconds
arms and push with your leg. Continue this have passed. Always try to hit the ground
throughout the move. behind some cover. Before moving, pick out
your next covered and concealed position and
the best route to it.
Make your move from the prone position
as follows:
Slowly raise your head and pick your
next position and the route to it.
Slowly lower your head.
Draw your arms into your body (keep-
ing your elbows in).
Pull your right leg forward.
Raise your body by straightening your
arms.
Get up quickly.
Run to the next position.
The high crawl lets you move faster than
the low crawl and still gives you a low silhouette.
Use this crawl when there is good concealment
but enemy fire prevents you from getting up.
Keep your body off the ground and resting on
your forearms and lower legs. Cradle your
weapon in your arms and keep its muzzle off
the ground. Keep your knees well behind your
buttocks so your body will stay low.
3-3

When you are ready to stop moving, do Lower the heel of the moving foot
the following: after the toe is in a solid place.
Plant both of your feet. Shift your body’s weight and balance
to the forward foot before moving the
Drop to your knees (at the same time rear foot.
slide a hand to the butt of your rifle).
Take short steps to help maintain
Fall forward, breaking the fall with
balance.
the butt of the rifle.
At night, and when moving through dense
Go to a prone firing position.
vegetation, avoid making noise. Hold your
weapon with one hand, and keep the other hand
If you have been firing from one position
forward, feeling for obstructions.
for some time, the enemy may have spotted you
When going into a prone position, use the
and may be waiting for you to come up from
following techniques:
behind cover. So, before rushing forward, roll
or crawl a short distance from your position.
Hold your rifle with one hand and
By coming up from another spot, you may fool
crouch slowly.
an enemy who is aiming at one spot, waiting for
you to rise. Feel for the ground with your free
hand to make sure it is clear of mines,
When the route to your next position is
tripwires, and other hazards.
through an open area, rush by zigzagging. If
necessary, hit the ground, roll right or left,
Lower your knees, one at a time, until
then rush again.
your body’s weight is on both knees
and your free hand.
MOVING WITH STEALTH
Shift your weight to your free hand
Moving with stealth means moving
and opposite knee.
quietly, slowly, and carefully. This requires
great patience.
Raise your free leg up and back, and
To move with stealth, use the following
lower it gently to that side.
techniques:
Move the other leg into position the
Hold your rifle at port arms (ready same way.
position).
Roll quietly into a prone position.
Make your footing sure and solid by
keeping your body’s weight on the
Use the following techniques when
foot on the ground while stepping.
crawling:
Raise the moving leg high to clear
brush or grass. Crawl on your hands and knees.
Hold your rifle in your firing hand.
Gently let the moving foot down toe Use your nonfiring hand to feel for
first, with your body’s weight on the and make clear spots for your hands
rear leg. and knees to move to.
3-4

Move your hands and knees to those
spots, and put them down softly.
IMMEDIATE ACTIONS
WHILE MOVING
This section furnishes guidance for the
immediate actions you should take when react-
ing to enemy indirect fire and flares.
REACTING TO INDIRECT FIRE
If you come under indirect fire while
moving, quickly look to your leader for orders.
He will either tell you to run out of the impact
area in a certain direction or will tell you to
follow him. If you cannot see your leader, but
can see other team members, follow them. If
alone, or if you cannot see your leader or the
other team members, run out of the area in a
direction away from the incoming fire.
3-5

FM 21-75
It is hard to move quickly on rough ter-
rain, but the terrain may provide good cover.
In such terrain, it may be best to take cover
and wait for flares to burn out. After they burn
out, move out of the area quickly.
REACTING TO GROUND FLARES
The enemy puts out ground flares as
warning devices. He sets them off himself or
attaches tripwires to them for you to trip on
and set them off. He usually puts the flares in
places he can watch.
If you are caught in the light of a ground
flare, move quickly out of the lighted area. The
enemy will know where the ground flare is and
will be ready to fire into that area. Move well
away from the lighted area. While moving out
of the area, look for other team members. Try to
follow or join them to keep the team together.
REACTING TO AERIAL FLARES
The enemy uses aerial flares to light up
vital areas. They can be set off like ground
3-6

FM 21-75
flares; fired from hand projectors, grenade
launchers, mortars, and artillery; or dropped
from aircraft.
If you hear the firing of an aerial flare
while you are moving, hit the ground (behind
cover if possible) while the flare is rising and
before it bursts and illuminates.
If moving where it is easy to blend with
the background (such as in a forest) and you
are caught in the light of an aerial flare, freeze
in place until the flare burns out.
If you are caught in the light of an aerial
flare while moving in an open area, immediately
crouch low or lie down.
If you are crossing an obstacle, such as a
barbed-wire fence or a wall, and get caught in
the light of an aerial flare, crouch low and stay
down until the flare burns out.
The sudden light of a bursting flare may
temporarily blind both you and the enemy.
When the enemy uses a flare to spot you, he
spoils his own night vision. To protect your
night vision, close one eye while the flare is
burning. When the flare burns out, the eye that
was closed will still have its night vision.
3-7

FM 21-75
MOVING WITHIN A TEAM
You will usually move as a member of a wedge, determined by the type weapon he
team. Small teams, such as infantry fire teams, carries. That position, however, may be changed
normally move in a wedge formation. Each by the team leader to meet the situation. The
soldier in the team has a set position in the normal distance between soldiers is 10 meters.
3-8

FM 21-75
You may have to make a temporary change Night identification for your patrol cap
in the wedge formation when moving through could be two l-inch by 1/2-inch strips of luminous
close terrain. The soldiers in the sides of the tape sewn vertically, directly on the rear of the
wedge close into a single file when moving in cap. They should be centered, with the bottom
thick brush or through a narrow pass. After edge of each tape even with the bottom edge of
passing through such an area, they should the cap and with a l-inch space between the
spread out, again forming the wedge. You two tapes.
should not wait for orders to change the for-
mation or the interval. You should change
FIRE AND MOVEMENT
automatically and stay in visual contact with
the other team members and the team leader. When a unit makes contact with the
enemy, it normally starts firing at and moving
The team leader leads by setting the
toward the enemy. Sometimes the unit may
example. His standing order is, FOLLOW ME
move away from the enemy. That technique is
AND DO AS I DO. When he moves to the left,
called fire and movement. It is conducted either
you should move to the left. When he gets
to close with and destroy the enemy, or to move
down, you should get down. When he fires, you
away from the enemy so as to break contact
should fire.
with him.
When visibility is limited, control during
movement may become difficult. Two l-inch The firing and moving take place at the
horizontal strips of luminous tape, sewn directly same time. There is a fire element and a move-
on the rear of the helmet camouflage band with ment element. These elements may be single
a l-inch space between them, are a device for soldiers, buddy teams, fire teams, or squads.
night identification. Regardless of the size of the elements, the action
is still fire and movement.
The fire element covers the move of the
movement element by firing at the enemy.
This helps keep the enemy from firing back
at the movement element.
The movement element moves either to
close with the enemy or to reach a better posi-
tion from which to fire at him. The movement
element should not move until the fire element
is firing.
Depending on the distance to the enemy
position and on the available cover, the fire
element and the movement element switch roles
as needed to keep moving.
Before the movement element moves
beyond the supporting range of the fire element
(the distance within which the weapons of the
fire element can fire and support the movement
3-9

FM 21-75
element), it should take a position from which with the enemy, you must dismount from the
it can fire at the enemy. The movement element tank at once.
then becomes the next fire element and the fire To mount a tank, first get permission from
element becomes the next movement element. the tank commander. Then mount from the
If your team makes contact, your team tank’s right front, not its left side where the coax
leader should tell you to fire or to move. He machinegun is mounted. Once mounted, move to
should also tell you where to fire from, what to the rear deck, stand, and hold on to the bustle
fire at, or where to move to. When moving, use rack. If there is not enough room for you on the
the low crawl, high crawl, or rush. rear deck, you may have to stand beside the
turret and hold onto a hatch or hatch opening.
MOVING WITH TANKS When riding on a tank, be alert for trees
that may knock you off and obstacles that may
You will often have to move with tanks. cause the tank to turn suddenly. Also be alert
When you must move as fast as the tanks, you for enemy troops that may cause the tank to
should ride on them. However, riding on a tank travers its turret quickly and fire.
makes you vulnerable to all types of fire. It also Riding on a tank is always hazardous and
reduces the tank’s maneuverability and the should be done only when the risks of riding
ability to traverse its turret. If contact is made are outweighed by the advantages of riding.
3-10

FM 21-75
CHAPTER 4
Observation
GENERAL
During all types of operations, you will be look-
ing for the enemy. However, there will be times when
you will be posted in an observation post (OP) to
watch for enemy activity.
An OP is a position from which you watch an
assigned sector of observation and report all activity
seen or heard in your sector. Chapter 6 provides
guidance on collecting and reporting information
learned by observation.
CONTENTS
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-1
HOW TO OBSERVE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-2
THINGS TO LOOK
AND LISTEN FOR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-4
RANGE ESTIMATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-4
4-1

FM 21-75
HOW TO OBSERVE
This section discusses the techniques you
will use for day and night observation.
DAY OBSERVATION
In daylight, use the visual search tech-
nique to search terrain. Do this in two steps:
Step 1. Make a quick, overall search
of the entire sector for obvious tar-
gets and unnatural colors, outlines, or
movements. Look first at the area just
in front of your position, and then
quickly scan the entire area out to the
maximum range you want to observe.
If the sector is wide, divide it and
search each subsector as in Step 2.
4-2

FM 21-75
Step 2. Observe overlapping, 50-meter-
wide strips, alternating from left to
right and right to left, until you have
searched the entire sector. When you
see a suspicious spot, search it well.
NIGHT OBSERVATION
At night, use anyone of three night obser-
vation techniques to search terrain.
Dark Adaptation Technique. First, let your
eyes become adjusted to the darkness. Do so
by staying either in a dark area for about 30
minutes, or in a red-lighted area for about
20 minutes followed by about 10 minutes in a
dark area. The red-lighted method may save
4-3

FM 21-75
time by allowing you to get orders, check equip- DUST OR VEHICLE EXHAUST
ment, or do some other job before moving into
Moving foot soldiers or vehicles often
darkness.
raise dust. Vehicle exhaust smoke also rises.
Off-Center Vision Technique. Focus your atten- You can spot dust and vehicle smoke at long
tion on an object but look slightly away from ranges.
it. The object will be more visible this way
than when you look straight at it. MOVEMENT
Scanning Technique. Again focus your atten- Look for movement in your sector. Use
tion on an object, but do not look directly at the visual search technique.
it. Now move your eyes in short, abrupt, and
irregular movements around it, pausing a few POSITIONS
seconds after each move.
Look for enemy positions in obvious
places, such as road junctions, hilltops, and
THINGS TO LOOK AND
lone buildings. Also look at areas with cover
LISTEN FOR
and concealment, such as woods and draws.
In trying to find the enemy in a sector
OUTLINES OR SHADOWS
of observation, look and listen for these signs
of his presence:
Look for outlines or shadows of enemy
soldiers, equipment, vehicles, or guns. The
Sounds.
enemy may use the shadows of trees or buildings
Dust or vehicle exhaust. to hide himself and his equipment. Look for
him in shaded areas.
Movement.
SHINE OR GLARE
Positions.
In darkness, look for light sources such as
Outlines or shadows.
burning cigarettes, headlights, or flashlights.
In daylight, look for reflected light or glare
Shine or glare.
from smooth, polished surfaces such as wind-
Contrasting colors. shields, headlights, mess gear, watch crystals,
or uncamouflaged skin.
SOUNDS CONTRASTING COLORS
Look for contrasts between background
Listen for such things as footsteps, limbs
color and the colors of uniforms, equipment,
or sticks breaking, leaves rustling, men cough-
and skin. For example, a soldier’s T-shirt or
ing, and equipment or vehicle sounds. These
towel may contrast with its background.
may be hard to distinguish from other battle-
field and animal sounds.
RANGE ESTIMATION
Sounds can alert you to the direction or
general location of the enemy. They may not You must often estimate ranges. Your
pinpoint his exact location. However, if a sound estimates will be easier to make and more accu-
alerts you, you are more apt to spot the enemy. rate if you use the 100-meter unit-of-measure
4-4

FM 21-75
method, the appearance-of-objects method, the headlights. Then, any time he sees an
or the flash-and-sound method. This section oncoming car that fits those dimensions, he
discusses the use of these methods. knows it is about 1 mile away.
1OO-METER UNIT-OF-MEASURE The same technique can be used to esti-
METHOD (DAYTIME) mate ranges on the battlefield. If you know the
apparent size and detail of troops and equip-
Picture a distance of 100 meters on the ment at known ranges, then you can compare
ground. For ranges up to 500 meters, count the those characteristics to similar objects at
number of 100-meter lengths between the two unknown ranges. When the characteristics
points you want to measure. Beyond 500 meters, match, the range does also.
pick a point halfway to the target, count the
number of 100-meter lengths to the halfway To use the appearance-of-objects method,
point, and then double that number to get the you must be familiar with characteristic details
range to the target. of objects as they appear at various ranges.
As you must be able to see those details to
Sloping ground changes the appearance of make the method work, anything that limits
l00-meter lengths. Ground that slopes upward visibility (such as weather, smoke, or darkness)
makes them look longer than 100 meters, and will limit the effectiveness of this method.
ground that slopes downward makes them look
COMBINATION OF METHODS
shorter than 100 meters. Thus, the tendency is
to underestimate 100-meter lengths on upslopes Battlefield conditions are not always
and overestimate them on downslopes. ideal for estimating ranges. If the terrain limits
the use of the 100-meter unit-of-measure
The accuracy of the 100-meter method method, and poor visibility limits the use of the
depends on how much ground is visible. This is appearance-of-objects method, you may have
most true at long ranges. If a target is at a to use a combination of methods. For example,
range of 500 meters or more, and you can only if you cannot see all of the terrain out to the
see part of the ground between yourself and target, you can still estimate distance from the
the target, it is hard to use this method with apparent size and detail of the target itself.
accuracy. A haze may obscure the target details, but you
may still be able to judge its size or use the
100-meter method. By using either one or both
APPEARANCE-OF-OBJECTS METHOD
of the methods, you should arrive at a figure
(DAYTIME)
close to the true range.
This method is a way to estimate range
FLASH-AND-SOUND METHOD
by the apparent size and detail of an object. It
(BEST AT NIGHT)
is a common method that is used in everyday
life. For example, a motorist trying to pass Sound travels through air at 300 meters
another car judges the distance of oncoming (1,100 feet) per second. That makes it possible
cars based on their apparent size. He is not to estimate distance if you can both see and
interested in exact distances, but only in having hear a sound-producing action.
enough room to safely pass the car in front
of him. Suppose he knows that at a distance of When you see the flash or smoke of a
1 mile an oncoming car appears to be 1 inch weapon, or the dust it raises, immediately start
wide and 2 inches high, with a half inch between counting. Stop counting when you hear the
4-5

FM 21-75
sound associated with the action seen. The meters. If you stop at three, the distance is
number at which you stop should be multi- about 900 meters. When you must count higher
plied by three. This gives you the approximate than nine, start over again after counting
distance to the weapon in hundreds of meters. nine (counting higher numbers throws the
If you stop at one, the distance is about 300 timing off).
4-6

FM 21-75
CHAPTER 5
Nuclear, Biological, And Chemical Warfare
GENERAL
Nuclear, biological, and chemical (NBC) weapons
can cause casualties, destroy or disable equipment,
restrict the use of terrain, and disrupt operations.
You must be prepared to fight and survive in an
environment where NBC weapons have been used.
This chapter prescribes active and passive pro-
tection measures that will avoid or reduce the effects
of NBC weapons.
CONTENTS
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-1
NUCLEAR WEAPONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-2
CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL
WEAPONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-5
5-1

FM 21-75
NUCLEAR WEAPONS
This section describes the characteristics
of nuclear explosions and their effects on sol-
diers, equipment, and supplies, and gives hasty
measures for protection against nuclear attacks.
CHARACTERISTICS OF NUCLEAR
EXPLOSIONS
The four main characteristics of nuclear
explosions are:
BLAST (an intense shock wave).
THERMAL RADIATION (heat and
light).
NUCLEAR RADIATION (radioactive
material).
EMP (electrical power surge).
5-2

FM 21-75
Blast produces an intense shockwave and parts of the body. This damage is the cause of
high winds that create flying debris. It may “radiation sickness.” The severity of this sick-
collapse shelters and some fighting positions. ness depends on the radiation dose received,
the length of exposure, and the condition of the
Thermal radiation causes burns and starts body at the time. The early symptoms of radia-
fires. The bright flash at the time of the ex- tion sickness will usually appear 1 to 6 hours
plosion can cause a temporary loss of vision after exposure. Those symptoms may include
or permanent eye damage if you look at the headache, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.
explosion, especially at night. Early symptoms may then be followed by a
latent period in which the symptoms disappear.
Nuclear radiation can cause casualties There is no first aid for you once you have been
and delay movements. It may last for days and exposed to nuclear radiation. The only help is
cover large areas of terrain. It occurs in two to get as comfortable as possible while under-
stages: initial and residual. going the early symptoms.
Initial radiation is emitted directly If the radiation dose was small, the symp-
from the fireball in the first minute toms, if any, will probably go away and not
after the explosion. It travels at the recur. If the symptoms recur after a latent
speed of light along straight lines and period, you should go to an aid station.
has high penetrating power.
EFFECTS ON EQUIPMENT
Residual radiation lingers after the AND SUPPLIES
first minute. It comes from the radio-
active material originally in a nuclear Blast can crush sealed or partly sealed
weapon or from material, such as soil objects like food cans, barrels, fuel tanks,
and equipment, made radioactive by and helicopters. Rubble from buildings being
the nuclear explosion. knocked down can bury supplies and equipment.
Heat can ignite dry wood, fuel, tar-
EMP is a massive surge of electrical
paulins, and other flammable material. Light
power. It is created the instant a nuclear
can damage eyesight.
detonation occurs and is transmitted at the
speed of light in all directions. It can damage Nuclear radiation can contaminate food
solid-state components of electrical equipment and water.
(radios, radars, computers, vehicles) and
weapon systems (TOW and Dragon). Equip- PROTECTION AGAINST
ment can be protected by disconnecting it from NUCLEAR ATTACKS
its power source and placing it in or behind
some type of shielding material (armored vehi- The best hasty protection against a nuclear
cle or dirt wall) out of the line of sight to the attack is to take cover behind a hill or in a fight-
burst. If no warning is received prior to a ing position, culvert, or ditch. If caught in the
detonation, there is no effective means of open, drop flat on the ground at once and close
protecting operating equipment. your eyes. Cover exposed skin and keep your
weapon under your body to avoid loss. If you
know the direction of the burst, drop with your
head away from the burst. Stay down until the
EFFECTS ON SOLDIERS
blast wave passes, then check for injuries and
equipment damage and prepare to continue the
The exposure of the human body to nuclear mission. See chapter 2 for additional considera-
radiation causes damage to the cells in all. tions in the building of your fighting positions.
5-3

FM 21-75
Radiation is the only direct nuclear effect
that lingers after the explosion. As it cannot be
detected by the senses, use radiac equipment
to detect its presence. Procedures for detection
can be found in FM 3-12 and FM 21-40. When
feasible, move out of the contaminated area.
If your unit must stay in the contaminated
area, it is best to stay in a dug-in position with
overhead cover. When time does not permit con-
structing a well-prepared overhead cover, use a
5-4

FM 21-75
EFFECTS ON EQUIPMENT
poncho. Stay under cover. When the fallout has Chemical and biological agents have little
finished falling, brush contamination off your- direct effect on equipment. Liquid chemical
self and your equipment. Wash yourself and agents on your equipment can restrict its use
your equipment as soon as the mission permits. until it is decontaminated.
EFFECTS ON TERRAIN
CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL
WEAPONS Liquid chemical agents may restrict the
use of terrain and buildings.
Enemy forces have both chemical and
biological weapons. These weapons may be used It is difficult to decontaminate terrain.
separately or together, with or without nuclear When time permits, it is best to wait for weather
weapons. Regardless of how they are used, you to decontaminate terrain naturally. Contami-
must be able to survive their effects and con- nated areas should be either bypassed or, when
tinue your mission. protective equipment is worn, crossed. After
crossing a contaminated area, decontaminate
yourself and your equipment as soon as the
CHARACTERISTICS OF CHEMICAL situation permits.
AND BIOLOGICAL AGENTS
AND TOXINS
EFFECTS ON SOLDIERS
Chemical agents are like poisonous pesti-
cides, but are far more powerful. They are meant
to kill or injure you and are released to cover Chemical and biological agents may enter
large areas. They may be released as gases, your body through your eyes, nose, mouth, or
liquids, or sprays. The enemy may use a mixture skin. They can disable or kill.
of agents to cause confusion and casualties.
Artillery, mortars, rockets, missiles, aircraft,
Liquid agents may be dispersed on you,
bombs, and land mines can deliver the agents.
your equipment, the terrain, and foliage. The
agents may linger for hours or days and en-
Biological agents are disease-producing
danger you when you are unprotected.
germs. They create a disease hazard where none
exists naturally. They may be dispersed as
Biological agents are hard to detect in
sprays by generators, or delivered by explosives,
early stages of use. If you find out or suspect
bomblets, missiles, and aircraft. They may also
that the enemy is using biological agents, report
be spread by the release of germ-carrying flies,
it to your leader.
mosquitoes, fleas, and ticks. The US Army does
not employ these agents, but other armies may.
The M8 automatic chemical-agent alarm
Toxins are poisonous substances produced can detect the presence of chemical agents in
by living things (such as snake venom). Toxins the air and produce an audible or visual signal.
are not living things and in this sense are It will detect nerve, blood, and choking agents.
chemicals. They would be used in combat in The M43A1 detects only nerve-agent vapor.
the same way as chemical-warfare agents, and The use and maintenance of the M8 alarm is the
they may disable or kill without warning. responsibility of the unit NBC defense team.
5-5
161-017 O - 94 - 3

FM 21-75
DETECTION OF CHEMICAL
AND BIOLOGICAL AGENTS
tasteless, and invisible in battlefield concentra-
tions. However, you can detect chemical agents
Your senses may not detect chemical by using the chemical-agent alarms and detec-
agents, as most agents are odorless, colorless, tion kits found in each company (FM 21-40).
5-6

FM 21-75
The ABC-M8 chemical-agent detector
paper comes in a booklet of 25 sheets. It is a
part of the M256 chemical-agent detector kit.
The paper sheets turn dark green, yellow, or
red on contact with liquid V-type nerve agents,
G-type nerve agents, or blister (mustard)
agents, respectively they do not detect vapor,
The test is not always reliable on porous material
such as wood or rubber. Many substances
(including some solvents and decontaminants)
can cause a color change in the paper, so such a
change indicates only that a chemical agent may
be present. Positive detector-paper tests should
be verified by testing with chemical-agent
detector kits.
ALARMS
If you recognize or suspect a chemical or
biological attack, STOP BREATHING, PUT
YOUR MASK ON, CLEAR AND CHECK IT,
AND GIVE THE ALARM set by your unit’s
SOP.
The M256 chemical-agent detector kit is
issued to squads. It is used to detect dangerous
vapor concentrations of nerve, blister, or blood
agents. It should be used when the platoon
or company is under chemical attack, when
a chemical attack is reported to be likely,
or when the presence of a chemical agent is
suspected.
5-7

FM 21-75
PROTECTION AGAINST CHEMICAL
AND BIOLOGICAL ATTACKS
Protective Equipment. Your main protection
against a CB attack is your protective mask.
It keeps you from inhaling chemical or bio-
logical agents. Additionally, protective clothing
will provide protection from liquid agents. Pro-
tective clothing includes the mask with hood,
the chemical protective suit (overgarment),
boots, and gloves.
Protection from Insects. The duty uniform and
gloves protect you against bites from insects
such as mosquitoes and ticks that may carry
disease-causing germs. Keep your clothes
buttoned and your trouser legs tucked into your
boots. Covering the skin reduces the chances
of an agent entering the body through cuts and
scratches. It also keeps disease-carrying insects
from reaching the skin. Insect repellents and
insecticides are effective against most disease-
carrying insects. High standards of sanitation
also protect against some insects.
5-8

FM 21-75
Mission-Oriented Protective Posture. MOPP is
a flexible system of protection against chemical
agents. Your leader will specify the level of
MOPP based on the chemical threat, workrate,
and temperature prior to performing a mission.
Later, he may direct a change in MOPP accord-
ing to the changing situation.
The MOPP level determines what equip-
ment you must wear and what you must carry.
The standard MOPP levels are shown in the
following chart.
The best local defense against biolog-
ical warfare is strict preventive medical and
sanitation measures and high standards of
personal hygiene.
Chemical Attack. When an individual displays
the symptoms of chemical-agent poisoning, first
aid must be given immediately to save his life.
Nerve agents. The symptoms of nerve-
agent poisoning are difficult breathing, drooling,
nausea, vomiting, convulsions, and sometimes
dim vision. The use of atropine autoinjectors
and artificial respiration are first-aid measures
for nerve-agent poisoning. If you have such
5-9

FM 21-75
symptoms, inject yourself with one injector in
the thigh. If symptoms persist, use another in-
jector. The interval between injections is 15
minutes. If you are unable to treat yourself, a
buddy must do it for you. He will inject three
injectors at once and administer artificial
respiration, if necessary. No more than three
atropine autoinjectors will be given. Seek
medical aid quickly.
Blister agents. The symptoms of blister-
agent poisoning are burning sensations in the
skin, eyes, and nose. The symptoms may be
immediate or delayed for several hours or days,
depending on the type of agent used. If blister
agents come in contact with the eyes or skin,
decontaminate the areas at once. Decontami-
nate the eyes by flushing them repeatedly with
plain water. Remove liquid blister agents from
the skin by using the items of the M258A1 kit.
If burns or blisters develop on the skin, cover
them with sterile gauze or a clean cloth to pre-
vent infection. Seek medical aid quickly.
Blood agents. The symptoms of blood-
agent poisoning are nausea, dizziness, throbbing
headache, skin/lips red or pink, convulsions,
and coma. If those symptoms appear, hold two
crushed ampules of amyl nitrite to the victim’s
nose. If in a contaminated area and the victim
is wearing the protective mask, insert the
crushed ampules inside the protective mask. If
symptoms persist, repeat the treatment, using
two crushed ampules about every 4 or 5 minutes
until normal breathing returns or until eight
ampules have been used. Breathing may become
difficult or stop. Seek medical aid quickly.
Choking agents. The symptoms of choking-
agent poisoning are coughing, choking, tight-
ness of the chest, nausea, headache, and water-
ing of the eyes. If you have these symptoms,
stay quiet and comfortable, but seek medical
aid quickly.
5-10

FM 21-75
CHEMICAL-AGENT DECONTAMINATION
OF SOLDIERS AND INDIVIDUAL
EQUIPMENT
Use the M258A1 skin decontaminating kit
to decontaminate your skim individual weapons,
and equipment. Instructions for the use of the
kit are printed on its container. This kit is es-
pecially made for skin decontamination however,
you may use it to decontaminate some personal
equipment such as your rifle, mask, and gloves.
The container for the M258A1 kit is a
plastic waterproof case with a metal strap hook
for attaching to clothing or equipment. It con-
tains three Decon 1 wipes and three Decon 2
wipes, sealed in tear-away envelopes. Each
Decon 1 wipe packet has a tab attached for
night identification and to assist in removal
from the case.
5-11

FM 21-75
CHEMICAL-AGENT DECONTAMINATION BIOLOGICAL-AGENT
OF UNIT EQUIPMENT DECONTAMINATION
Decontaminate key weapons with DS2 Decontaminate your body by showering
decontaminating solution, soapy water, sol- with soap and hot water. Use germicidal soap
vents, or slurry. After decontamination, dis- if available. Clean your nails thoroughly and
assemble weapons and wash, rinse, and oil scrub the hairy parts of your body. Wash con-
them to prevent corrosion. Decontaminate taminated clothing in hot, soapy water if it
ammunition with DS2 solution, wipe with cannot be sent to a field laundry for decontami-
gasoline-soaked rags, and then dry it. If DS2 is nation. Cotton items may be boiled.
not available, wash ammunition in cool, soapy
water, then dry it thoroughly.
Wash vehicles with soapy water (prefer
Decontaminate optical instruments by ably hot). If possible, steam-clean them using
blotting them with rags, wiping with lens detergent.
cleaning solvent, and then letting them dry.
Decontaminate communication equipment Wash equipment in hot, soapy water and
by airing, weathering, or hot air (if available). let it air dry.
5-12

FM 21-75
CHAPTER 6
Combat Intelligence And Counterintelligence
GENERAL
Using the observation techniques discussed in
chapter 4, you must collect and report information
about the enemy, terrain, and weather. That
information becomes combat intelligence after it is
interpreted. Your leaders need combat intelligence
to help them plan operations. Your life and the lives
of your fellow soldiers could depend on reporting
what you see, hear, and smell.
CONTENTS
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-1
SOURCES OF INFORMATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-2
WHAT TO REPORT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-2
COUNTERINTELLIGENCE
MEASURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6-5
6-1

FM 21-75
WHAT TO REPORT
You must also act to keep the enemy from
gaining information about US operations. That Report all information about the enemy to
action, called counterintelligence, involves: your leader quickly, accurately, and completely.
Such reports should answer the questions
Denying the enemy information about WHO? WHAT? WHERE? after “WHEN?”
US plans, intentions, and. activities. It is best to use the “SALUTE” format (size,
activity, location, unit, time, and equipment)
Detecting the enemy’s efforts to get when reporting. To help you remember details,
information. make notes and draw sketches.
Deceiving the enemy as to US plans
and intentions.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Commanders get information from many
agencies, but you are their best agency. You can
collect information from the following sources
Prisoners of war (PW) are an imme-
diate source of information. Turn
captured soldiers over to your leader
quickly. Also, tell him anything you
learn from them.
Captured documents may contain
valuable information about present or Size. Report the number of soldiers and vehi-
future enemy operations. Give such cles you saw. For example, report ‘‘ 10 enemy
documents to your leader quickly. infantrymen” (not “a rifle squad”) or ‘‘3 enemy
tanks” (not “an enemy tank platoon”).
Enemy activity (the things the enemy
is doing) often indicates what he is Activity. Report what you saw the enemy doing.
going to do. Report everything you For example, “emplacing mines in the road.”
see the enemy do. Some things that
may not seem important to you may Location. Report where you saw the enemy. If
be important to your commander. you have a map, try to give an eight-digit co-
ordinate, such as “GL 874461.” If you do not
Local civilians often have information have a map, relate the location to some key
about the enemy, terrain, and weather terrain, such as “on the Harm Road, 300 meters
in an area. Report any information south of the Ken River Bridge.”
gained from civilians. However, you
cannot be sure which side the civilians Unit. Report the enemy’s unit. If the unit is
are trying to help, so be careful when not known, report any distinctive features,
acting on information obtained from such as bumper markings on trucks, or type
them. Try to confirm that information of headgear. Some armies have distinctive
by some other means. uniforms and headgear, or colored tabs on their
6-2

FM 21-75
uniforms, to identify types of units. A unit’s HANDLING PWs
action may also indicate its type. The kind of
equipment observed may be peculiar to a certain In handling PWs, follow the five S’s:
type of unit. For example, a BRDM may indi-
cate a reconnaissance unit. 1. Search PWs as soon as they are cap-
tured. Take their weapons and papers,
Time. Report the time you saw the enemy except identification papers and pro-
activity, not the time you report it. Always tective masks. Give them a written
report local or Zulu (Z) time. receipt for any personal property and
documents taken. Tag documents and
Equipment. Report all of the equipment the personal property to show which PW
enemy is wearing or using. If you do not recog- had them.
nize an item of equipment or a type of vehicle,
sketch it and submit the sketch with the report. When searching a PW, have one man
The following is an example of a SALUTE guard him while another searches him.
report. (A searcher must not get between a PW
and the guard.) To search a PW, have
him spread-eagle against a tree or wall,
or get into a pushup position with his
FM: 1st Plt, C Co, 2d Bn, 1/73 Inf. knees on the ground. Search him, his
TO S2, 2d Bn, 1/73 Inf. equipment, his clothing.
Combat OP sighted four enemy tanks moving
west along secondary road at grid coordinates
NB613397 at 241730Z. Tanks traveling at
approximately 5 kilometers per hour. Hatches
were open and visible enemy personnel were
wearing protective masks.
PRISONERS OF WAR AND
CAPTURED DOCUMENTS
PWs are a good source of information.
They must be handled without breaking inter-
national law and without losing a chance to
gain intelligence.
Treat PWs humanely. Do not harm them,
either physically or mentally. The senior soldier
present is responsible for their care. If PWs
cannot be evacuated in a reasonable time, give
them food, water, and first aid. Do not give
them cigarettes, candy, or other comfort items.
PWs who receive favors or are mistreated are
poor interrogation subjects.
6-3

FM 21-75
2. Segregate PWs into groups by sex 5. Safeguard PWs when taking them to
and into subgroups such as enlisted the rear. Do not let anyone abuse them.
personnel, civilians, and political figures. Watch out for escape attempts. Do not
This keeps the leaders from promoting let PWs bunch up, spread out too far,
escape efforts. Keep the groups segre- or start diversions. Such conditions
gated as you move them to the rear. may create a chance for escape.
3. Silence PWs and do not let them talk If a PW is wounded and cannot be
to each other. This keeps them from evacuated through normal channels,
planning escape and cautioning each turn him over to an aidman to be evacu-
other on security. Report anything a ated through medical channels.
PW says or does.
Before evacuating a PW, attach a tag
4. Speed PWs to the rear. Turn them to him. You can make these tags your-
over to your leader. He will assemble self. The format for the tags is given in
them and move them to the rear for the following illustration. The battalion
questioning by the S2. S2 should be able to supply these tags.
6-4

FM 21-75
HANDLING CAPTURED DOCUMENTS Not take personal letters or pictures
AND EQUIPMENT into combat areas.
Enemy documents and equipment are Not keep diaries in combat areas.
good sources of information. Documents may
be official (maps, orders, records, photos) or Be careful when discussing military
personal (letters or diaries). affairs (the enemy may be listening).
If such items are not handled properly,
the information in them may become lost or Use only authorized codes.
outdated. Give them to your leader quickly.
Tag each item using the form shown above. Abide by the Code of Conduct (if
If the item was found on a PW, put that PW’s captured).
name on the tag.
Report any soldier or civilian who is
believed to be serving or sympathetic
COUNTERINTELLIGENCE
with the enemy.
MEASURES
The enemy must not get information about Report anyone who tries to get infor-
US operations. This means that you and your mation about US operations.
fellow soldiers must:
Destroy all maps or important docu-
Practice camouflage principles and ments if capture is imminent.
techniques.
Not discuss military operations in
Practice noise and light discipline. public areas.
Practice field sanitation. Discuss military operations only with
those persons having a need to know
Use proper radiotelephone procedure. the information.
Use the challenge and password Remind fellow soldiers of their coun-
properly. terintelligence responsibilities.
6-5

FM 21-75
CHAPTER 7
Communications
GENERAL
Communications are exchanges of information
by two or more parties. The information must be
transmitted and received/understood.
You must know how to communicate with your
leaders and fellow soldiers. You must be able to tell:
What you see.
What you are doing.
What you have done.
What you are going to do.
What you need.
CONTENTS
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7-1
MEANS OF COMMUNICATION . . . . . . . . . . 7-2
RADIOTELEPHONE PROCEDURE . . . . . . . 7-4
COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY. . . . . . . . . . 7-10
RADIO EQUIPMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7-11
WIRE AND TELEPHONE
EQUIPMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7-15
7-1

FM 21-75
MEANS OF COMMUNICATION
There are several means of communica- To put these radios to good use, you must
tions. Each has its own capabilities, advantages, first look at some of the things that affect radio
and disadvantages. Those you can use are communications. To communicate with each
described in this section. other, radios must have a common frequency.
They must also be able to transmit and receive
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS the same type signal. Most infantry radios are
FM (frequency modulated) and will not com-
Radios are a frequently used means of
municate with AM (amplitude modulated)
communications. Radios are particularly suited
radios. Squelch settings on the radios must
for use when you are on the move and need a
also be used correctly.
means of maintaining command and control.
Small handheld or backpacked radios that com- Factors that affect the range of radio
municate for only short distances are found at equipment are weather, terrain, antenna, power,
squad and platoon level. As the need grows to and the location of the radio. Trying to commu-
talk over greater distances and to more units, nicate near man-made objects such as bridges
the size and complexity of radios are increased. and buildings may also affect radio transmis-
7-2

FM 21-75
sions. Interference in the form of static often means. Your commander will set prearranged
occurs when you use radios near powerlines or meanings for pyrotechnics, smoke, and
electrical generators. Interference may also flashing lights. Generally, a listing of prear-
come from other radio stations, bad weather, ranged messages using these signals is con-
or enemy jamming. tained in your unit SOP or communications-
electronics operation instructions (CEOI).
Many of the things that may cause poor
radio communications can be corrected by using Panel markers are a series of cloth panels
common sense. Such things as making sure that that you spread on the ground to communicate
you are not trying to communicate from under with aircraft. They are useful when you do not
a steel bridge or near generators and power- have radio contact with friendly aircraft, when
lines, using the best available antenna for your
ground units and/or aircraft are on radio listen-
needs, and selecting the best site for your radio ing silence, when your radio equipment has
help insure more reliable communications. You
been damaged or destroyed, or when enemy
can also reduce the effects of enemy jamming
jamming makes radio communications difficult
by employing antijamming techniques.
or impossible. When standard cloth panels are
not available, you can use field expedients such
Radio is one of the least secure means of as clothing, branches, rocks, or snow.
communicating. Each time you talk over a radio,
the sound of your voice travels in all directions.
Panel codes, as well as arm-and-hand
The enemy can listen to your radio transmis-
signals, have standard prearranged meanings.
sions while you are communicating with other
The prearranged meaning of arm-and-hand
friendly radio stations. You must always assume
signals may be found in FM 21-60. Information
that the enemy is listening to get information
is usually taken from those publications and
about you and your unit, or to locate your posi-
placed in unit CEOIs and SOPs.
tion to destroy you with artillery fire. Everyone
who uses radios must know the defensive tech-
niques available to prevent the enemy from Visual signals have some shortcomings
getting information. that limit their use. For example, visual signals
can be easily misunderstood. Some visual
VISUAL COMMUNICATIONS signals are restricted during poor visibility
such as at night or in dense terrain. Of course,
The enemy’s ability to interfere with your at other times, they can be intercepted by the
radio signals is causing more emphasis to be enemy who may, in turn, use similar visual
placed on visual communications for command signals to create confusion.
and control. Visual signals include arm-and-
hand signals, pyrotechnics, smoke, flashing
SOUND COMMUNICATIONS
lights, panel markers, and aircraft maneuvers.
The effectiveness of any visual signal Sound signals, like visual signals, depend
depends on a set of prearranged meanings. You upon a set of prearranged meanings. Sound
assign prearranged meanings to visual signals signals include the use of the voice, whistles,
to the soldier sending the signal and the soldier horns, weapons, and other noise-making devices
seeing the signal so both have the same to transmit simple messages over short dis-
understanding of what that particular signal tances. Also, like visual signals, sound signals
7-3

FM 21-75
are vulnerable to enemy interception and use. may be difficult in dense vegetation, in swampy
Battle noise can obviously reduce the effective areas, or in mountainous terrain. Rain, snow,
use of sound signals. They have their greatest and temperature extremes may also influence
application as command post warning alarms. wire laying. Men and equipment to lay wire
The prearranged meanings for sound signals are lines should be available.
usually established by local commanders, and a
listing of such meanings is commonly found in MESSENGER COMMUNICATIONS
unit SOPS and the CEOIs. Sound signals, like
visual signals, can be easily misunderstood. Unlike other infantry communications,
messengers are a means of transmitting large
maps, documents, and bulk material, as well as
WIRE COMMUNICATIONS
oral or written messages. Message centers serve
Wire is another type of communications as a central point for receiving and distributing
used in infantry units. Although installing a message-type information. They are located at
wire network takes more time than installing battalion or higher level headquarters. Messen-
a radio, wire lines are usually more secure than ger service may be limited, however, because
radio. When you talk over wire lines, your voice messengers are subject to enemy action, require
travels through the wire lines from one tele- more time than radio or wire communications,
phone to another and is generally not sent and do not afford real time writer-to-reader
through the air. Wire lines will give better com- exchanges.
munications in most cases because they are less
subject to interference from weather, terrain, RADIOTELEPHONE
and man-made obstacles. Wire lines also protect PROCEDURE
you from enemy electronic warfare actions
such as jamming. Radiotelephone procedure is a set proce-
dure for using a radio or telephone. It speeds the
Wire lines are subject to breakage by exchange of messages and helps avoid errors.
enemy artillery and air strikes and by friendly The rules listed below will help you use trans-
forces who accidentally cut the lines when mission times efficiently and avoid violations
driving over them with tracked and wheeled of communications security.
vehicles. It is important, therefore, to install
wire lines properly to reduce the possibility of 1. Transmit clear, complete, and concise
breakage. When laying wire lines, first consider messages. When possible, write them out
the tactical situation. In a fast-moving situa- beforehand.
tion, the use of wire may be impractical. In a
static situation, you have more time to install 2. Speak clearly, slowly, and in natural
wire lines. phrases. Enunciate each word. If a re-
ceiving operator must write the message,
Consideration must be given to the enemy’s allow time for him to do so.
ability to jam radios and to locate positions
through direction finding when you communi- 3. Listen before transmitting, to avoid
cate by radio. If the enemy has displayed such interfering with other transmissions.
capabilities, wire should be considered as an
alternative to radio. The terrain will also influ- 4. ALWAYS ASSUME THE ENEMY
ence use of wire communications. Wire laying IS LISTENING.
7-4

FM 21-75
PHONETIC ALPHABET
To help identify spoken letters, a set of
easily understood words has been selected.
Those words help to avoid confusion. BRAVO,
for example, is the phonetic word of the letter
B, and DELTA is the phonetic word for the
letter D. BRAVO and DELTA are less likely to
be confused in a radio message than B and D.
Use the phonetic alphabet to:
Transmit isolated letters.
Transmit each letter of an abbrevia-
tion.
Spell out unusual or difficult words.
7-5

FM 21-75
Example: The word MANEUVER
must be transmitted and can be pronounced.
“MANEUVER – I SPELL - Mike-Alpha-
November-Echo -Uniform-Victor- Echo-Romeo
– MANEUVER.”
If you cannot pronounce the word, do not
attempt to pronounce it. Instead, precede the
word with the proword “I SPELL.”
Example The word EVACUATE must
be transmitted and cannot be pronounced.
“I SPELL - Echo-Victor-Alpha-Charlie-
Uniform-Alpha-Tango-Echo.”
Transmit multiple digit numbers digit by
digit. Two exceptions to this are when trans-
mitting exact multiples of thousands and when
identifying a specific code group in a coded mes-
sage. When calling for or adjusting field artillery
or mortar fire, it is necessary to transmit, when
applicable, exact multiples of hundreds and
thousands using the appropriate noun.
7-6

FM 21-75
PROWORDS
Certain procedural words (prowords)
which have distinct meaning should be used
to shorten transmissions and avoid confusion.
7-7

FM 21-75
PROWORD EXPLANATION
CORRECTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .An error has been made in this transmission.
Transmission will continue with the last word
correctly transmitted.
An error has been made in this transmission
(or message indicated). The correct version is
.
That which follows is a corrected version in answer
to your request for verification.
FLASH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Flash precedence is reserved for alerts, warnings,
or other emergency actions having immediate
bearing on national, command, or area security
(e.g., presidential use; announcement of an alert;
opening of hostilitie; land, air, or sea catastro-
phles; intelligence reports on matters leading to
enemy attack; potential or actual nuclear accident
or incident; implementation of services unilateral
emergency actions procedures).
FROM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .The originator of this massage is indicated by the
address designator immediately following.
GROUPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .This message contains the number of groups indi-
cated by the numeral following.
I AUTHENTICATE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .The group that follows is the reply to your challenge
to authenticate.
IMMEDIATE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..Immediate precedence is reserved for vital corn.
munications that (1) have an immediate operational
effect on tactical operations, (2) directly concern
safety or rescue operations, (3) affect the intelli-
gence community operational role (e.g., initial vital
reports of damage due to enemy action; land, sea,
or air reports that must be completed from vehicles
in motion such as operational mission aircraft;
intelligence reports on vital actions in progress;
natural disaster or widespread damage; emergency
weather reports having an immediate bearing on
mission in progress; emergency use for circuit
restoration; use by tactical command posts for
passing immediate operational traffic).
I READ BACK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The following is my response to your instructions
to read back.
7-8

FM 21-75
PROWORD EXPLANATION
I SAY AGAIN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .I am repeating transmission or part indicated.
I SPELL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .I shall spell the next word phonetically.
MESSAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .A message which requires recording is about to
follow. Transmitted immediately after the call. (This
proword is not used on nets primarily employed for
conveying messages. H is intended for use when
messages are passed on tactical or reporting nets.)
MORE TO FOLLOW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Transmitting station has additional traffic for the
receiving station.
OUT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .This is the end of my transmission to you and no
answer is required.
OVER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...This is the end of my transmission to you and a
response is necessary. Go ahead: transmit.
PRIORITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Priority precedence is reserved for calls that re-
quire prompt completion for national defense and
security, the successful conduct of war, or to safe-
guard life or property, and do not require higher
precedence (e.g., reports of priority land, sea, or air
movement; administrative, intelligence, operational
or logistic activity calls requiring priority action;
calls that would have serious impact on military,
administrative, intelligence, operational, or logistic
activities if handled as a ROUTINE call). Normally,
PRIORITY will be the highest precedence that may
be assigned to administrative matters for which
speed of handling is of paramount importance.
RADIO CHECK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .What is my signal strength and readability. In other
words, how do you read (hear) me?
READ BACK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Repeat this entire transmission back to me exactly
as received.
RELAY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Transmit this message to all addressees immedi-
ately following this proword.
ROGER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .I have received your last transmission satisfactorily,
and loud and clear.
7-9

FM 21-75
PROWORD EXPLANATION
ROUTINE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Routine precedence is reserved for all official com-
munications that do not require flash, immediate,
or priority precedence.
SAY AGAIN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Repeat your last transmission or the part indicated
SILENCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Cease transmissions on this net immediately.
(Repeated three or more times.) Silence will be maintained until lifted. (When an
authentication system is in force, the transmission
imposing silence is to be authenticated.)
SILENCE LIFTED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ......Silence is lifted. (When an authentication system
is in force, the transmission lifting silence is to be
authenticated.)
SPEAK SLOWER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .You are transmitting too fast. Slow down.
THIS IS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .This transmission is from the station whose desig-
nation immediately follows.
TIME . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .That which immediately follows is the time or
date-time group of the message.
TO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .The addressees immediately following are ad-
dressed for action.
UNKNOWN STATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .... . . .The identity of the station with whom I am attempt-
ing to communicate is unknown.
WAIT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .I must pause for a few seconds.
WAIT-OUT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . ..I must pause longer than a few seconds.
WILCOX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .I have received your signal, understand It, and will
comply. To be used only by the addressee. As the
meaning of ROGER is included in that of WILCO,
the two prowords are never used together.
COMMUNICATIONS SECURITY
Communications security keeps unauthor- Using only approved codes.
ized persons from gaining information of value
from radio and telephone transmissions. It Designating periods when all radios
includes: are turned off.
Restricting the use of radio transmit-
Using authentication to make sure
ters and monitoring radio receivers.
that the other communicating station
is a friendly one. Operating radios on low power.
7-10

FM 21-75
Enforcing net discipline and radio-
telephone procedure (all stations must
use authorized prosigns and prowords,
and must transmit official traffic only).
Using radio sites with hills or other
shields between them and the enemy.
Using directional antennas when
feasible.
RADIO EQUIPMENT
soldier should be familiar with the
AN/PRC-77 radio and the two types of squad
radios. One type of squad radio is the AN/PRC-
68 Small Unit Transceiver (SUT). The other
comes in two parts the AN/PRT-4 (transmitter)
and the AN/PRR-9 (receiver).
To operate the AN/PRC-77 radio:
Install the battery.
Replace the battery compartment and
close both latches at the same time.
Select the antenna (plus antenna base)
and tighten it down.
Connect the handset.
Select the frequency band.
Set the frequency using the tuning
control knobs.
Turn the function switch to ON.
Turn the volume control knob about
half a turn.
Depress the push-to-talk switch on
the handset to talk and release it to
listen.
Adjust the volume control to the de-
sired level.
7-11

FM 21-75
To operate the AN/PRC-68 radio Turn the PWR OFF/ON/SQUELCH
switch to SQUELCH (this switch is
spring-loaded and will return to ON
Install the battery. when disengaged).
Set the channel position (O through 9) Turn the volume knob to adjust loud-
(your leader will tell you which channel ness of received signal.
to use).
Depress the push-to-talk switch on
Connect the handset. the handset or the back of the radio to
transmit and release it to listen.
Connect the antenna.
NOTE: Handset is not a part of AN/ PRC-68 (H-189
Turn the PWR OFF/ON/SQUELCH and H-250 handset).
switch to ON.
7-12

FM 21-75
To operate the AN/PRR-9 radio when voice or tone is heard. If the control knob
is turned clockwise to its last position, the
Insert the tubular BA-505/U battery
squelch is turned off (background noise will
through the battery clip and into the
start). To reactivate the squelch, turn the con-
mating connector of the receiver.
trol knob to OFF, then back about halfway
toward ON.
Clip the receiver to your helmet.
For receiving without squelch, turn the
Loosen the antenna retaining screw
receiver control knob fully clockwise from its
and rotate the antenna upright (re-
OFF position. Turn it counterclockwise to a
tighten retaining screw).
comfortable listening level. Do not use squelch
when signals are weak or in terrain unfavorable
Set the receiver control.
for good reception.
For receiving with squelch, turn the re- Wear the receiver either on your combat
ceiver control knob clockwise from its OFF suspenders or clipped to your pocket, belt, or
position. Set it to a comfortable listening level helmet. Use a lanyard to tie the receiver down.
7-13

FM 21-75
To operate the AN/PRT-4 radio: For a tone signal, turn the tone-voice
switch to the TONE position and hold it in that
Release both battery case clamps and position for as long as the tone signal is needed.
remove the battery case. Release the switch at the end of that time.
Insert a BA-399/U battery into the
For voice communications, turn the tone-
mating connector at the bottom of
voice switch to the VOICE position and hold it
transmitter.
in that position while transmitting. Speak into
the microphone located above the channel
Replace the battery case and secure
selector switch. Release the tone-voice switch
the clamps.
at the end of the transmission.
Raise the collapsible antenna to its
To permit transmissions in only one mode,
full height.
position the override spring on either VOICE
Set the upper selector switch in the or TONE, depending on which is needed.
CH-1 position for channel 1 or the
CH-2 position for channel 2. Wear the transmitter clipped to your
pocket, belt, or suspenders. To prevent loss of
Set the TONE-VOICE switch. the transmitter, use a lanyard to tie it down.
7-14

FM 21-75
WIRE AND TELEPHONE
EQUIPMENT
The telephone set TA-1 is a sound-powered
When in the defense, units normally com-
phone that has both a visual and an audible
municate by wire and messenger instead of by
signal. It has a range of 6.4 km using WD-1 wire.
radio. Your leaders will often have you lay the
wire and install and operate the field phones.
WIRE-LAYING TECHNIQUES
A surface line is field wire laid on the
ground. Lay surface lines loosely with plenty
of slack. Slack makes installation and main-
tenance easier. Surface lines take less time and
fewer soldiers to install. When feasible, dig
small trenches for the wire to protect it from
shell fragments of artillery or mortar rounds.
Conceal wire routes crossing open areas from
enemy observation. Tag all wire lines at switch-
boards and at road, trail, and rail crossings to
identify the lines and make repair easier if a
line is cut.
An overhead line is field wire laid above
the ground. Lay overhead lines near command
posts, in assembly areas, and along roads where
heavy vehicular traffic may drive off the road. To install the TA-1 telephone:
Also, lay them at road crossings where trenches
Strip away half an inch of insulation
cannot be dug, if culverts or bridges are not
from each strand of the WD-1 wire line.
available. Those lines are the least likely to be
damaged by vehicles or weather. Depress the spring-loaded line bind-
ing posts and insert one strand of the
wire into each post.
Adjust signal volume control knob
to LOUD.
Depress the generator lever several
times to call the other operator and
listen for buzzer sound.
Turn the buzzer volume control knob
until the wanted volume is obtained.
Look at the visual indicator to see if it
shows four white luminous markings.
Depress the push-to-talk switch to
reset the visual indicator.
7-15

FM 21-75
The telephone set TA-312 is a battery- Turn the circuit selector switch to LB.
powered phone. It has a range of 38 km using
WD-1 wire. Insert the two BA-30 batteries into
the battery compartment (one up and
To install the TA-312 telephone:
one down).
Strip away one-half inch of insula-
tion from each strand of the WD-1 Seat the handset firmly in the retain-
wire line. ing cradle.
Depress the spring-loaded line bind- Turn the handcrank rapidly a few
ing posts and insert one strand of the turns. Remove the handset from the
wire into each post. retaining cradle and wait for the other
operator to answer.
Adjust buzzer volume control knob to
LOUD. Depress the push-to-talk switch to
talk. Release the push-to-talk switch
Turn the INT-EXT switch to INT. to listen.
7-16

FM 21-75
REEL EQUIPMENT CE-11
The reel equipment CE -11 is a light-
weight, portable unit used for laying and picking
up short wire lines. It has the following com-
ponents:
Reeling machine, cable, band, RL-39,
with an axle and crank, carrying
handles, and straps ST-34 and ST-35.
Telephone set TA-1/PT.
The RL-39 component mounts the reel
cable DR-8 that will hold 400 meters
of field wire WD-1/TT. The DR-8 and
the wire are separate items and ARE
NOT part of the CE-11 or the RL-39.
The major parts of the CE -11 may also be
authorized by TOE as separate items and not
as a complete unit CE -11.
7-17

FM 21-75
CHAPTER 8
First Aid And Personal Hygiene
GENERAL
First aid is the care and treatment you give a
casualty before medical personnel arrive. Personal
hygiene is the steps you take to protect your own
health and that of others. Your personal-hygiene
and first-aid skills could save your life or the life of
a buddy.
By knowing what to do, and by getting medical
help quickly, you may be able to save lives, prevent
permanent disabilities, and prevent long periods of
hospitalization.
CONTENTS
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8-1
LIFESAVING MEASURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8-2
DOs AND DON'Ts
OF FIRST AID . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8-16
PERSONAL HYGIENE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8-16
8-1
161-017 0 - 94 - 4

FM 21-75
The field first-aid packet issued to you
should be carried at all times for personal use.
It contains one or two field first-aid dressings.
Use the first-aid dressings on wounds. When
giving first aid to a casualty, you should use the
casualty’s first-aid items. You may need your
own items later if you become injured. For more
information on first aid, see FM 21-11.
LIFESAVING MEASURES
When you or your buddy is wounded, first
aid must be given at once. The first step is to
apply (as needed) the four life-saving measures.
These measures are:
Clear the airway; cheek and restore
breathing and heartbeat.
Stop the bleeding.
Prevent shock.
Dress and bandage the wound.
8-2

FM 21-75
CLEAR THE AIRWAY; CHECK AND
RESTORE BREATHING AND HEARTBEAT
Clear the Airway. The lack of oxygen intake
through breathing and lack of heartbeat leads
to death in a very few minutes.
When treating a casualty, first find out
if he is breathing. If he is not breathing
Place him on his back and kneel beside
his head.
Clear his airway by removing any ob-
struction in his mouth.
Place your hand (the hand nearest his
feet) under his neck and put your
other hand on his forehead. Extend his
neck by lifting with the hand under
the neck and pushing down on the
forehead. This also lifts the tongue
away from the back of the throat,
opening the airway.
8-3

FM 21-75
Check for Breathing. After opening the airway,
LOOK, LISTEN, and FEEL to find out if the
casualty is breathing. The following procedures
should be used:
Put your ear near the casualty’s mouth
and nose: hold this position for about
5 seconds.
LOOK to see if the casualty’s chest is
rising and falling.
LISTEN and FEEL for breathing.
Restore Breathing. IF THERE ARE NO
SIGNS OF BREATHING, START MOUTH-
TO-MOUTH RESUSCITATION AT ONCE.
The following procedures should be used
Put a hand under the casualty’s neck
to keep the head tilted far back.
Press down on his forehead with the
other hand.
Move this hand and pinch his nostrils
between your thumb and index finger.
Open his mouth wide.
8-4

FM 21-75
Take a deep breath and place your
mouth over his, making an airtight
seal with your lips.
Blow into his mouth.
Give four or five quick but full breaths
to make sure his lungs are full.
Remove your mouth, turn your head,
and LOOK, LISTEN, and FEEL for
exhaled air.
Repeat this procedure once every 5
seconds until the casualty exhales.
8-5

FM 21-75
If you feel strong resistance when you first
blow air into the casualty’s mouth, quickly
reposition his head and try again. If the airway
is still not clear, roll him onto his side. Hit him
sharply between his shoulder blades with the
heel of your hand to dislodge any foreign objects.
If the casualty’s abdomen bulges (air going
into stomach), apply gentle pressure on his
abdomen with one hand to force the air out.
If this makes the casualty vomit, quickly turn
him onto his side, clean out his mouth, and con-
tinue giving mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
Check for Heartbeat. When you find an un-
conscious casualty, check to see if he has a
heartbeat and if he is breathing. To check for
heartbeat, use the following procedures:
Tilt the casualty’s head back.
Place your fingers on his throat.
Feel for the Adam’s apple.
Slide the fingers down from the
Adam’s apple to the side of the throat.
This will place the fingertips over an
artery, where the pulse can be felt.
8-6

FM 21-75
Restore Heartbeat. You must start external
heart massage quickly, as permanent damage to
the brain may occur if it is deprived of oxygen-
ated blood. Examples of times without oxygen
and likelihood of brain damage are listed below:
External heart massage provides artificial
circulation by squeezing the heart between the
breastbone and the backbone, forcing blood
through the lungs, brain, and body.
To perform mouth-to-mouth resuscitation
and external heart massage at the same time:
Kneel at the casualty’s side.
Blow four quick but full breaths into
the casualty (as described earlier) to
fill the lungs with air (his head must
be tilted back and his airway open).
Locate the tip of the breastbone and
measure two finger-widths up from
that tip.
Place the heel of the other hand along
side the fingers. Then, put both hands
together and interlace the fingers.
Push downward on the chest 15 times
at a rate of 80 counts per minute.
8-7

FM 21-75
After each 15 compressions, shift posi-
tions slightly and give him 2 quick,
but full, breaths.
Continue this 15 to 2 ratio:
Until the casualty can breathe
by himself and his pulse returns.
Until relieved by someone.
Until the casualty is dead.
If two of you are present, one should give
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and the other
should give heart massage. In that case, the
procedure is slightly different. The soldier
Lean forward with the elbows locked. giving the heart massage should change the
number of compressions from 15 at a time to 5,
That will compress the casualty’s keeping the 80-per-minute rate. The soldier
chest about 1½ to 2 inches. Then re- giving mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, should
lease the pressure on the chest. give 2 breaths after each 5 compressions.
8-8

FM 21-75
STOP THE BLEEDING
If the casualty is breathing and his heart both entry and exit points. This is to see that
is beating, the next thing to do is to stop the nothing is overlooked, as a bullet usually
bleeding of the wound. Before you stop the makes a smaller wound where it enters than
bleeding, you must find all wounds. Look for where it exits.
8-9

FM 21-75
After finding all wounds, stop the bleeding side of the dressing that goes on
by using the following procedure: the wound).
Without touching or trying to clean
the wound, cut and lift the clothing
away from the wound to expose it. Do
not touch the wound or try to remove
objects from it.
Put a field first-aid dressing on the
wound, trying not to contaminate the
dressing or the wound. To put on the
dressing:
Remove the dressing from its
plastic envelope and twist it to
break the paper wrapper.
Place the dressing on the wound
without letting it touch anything
else.
Grasp the folded dressing with
both hands (do not touch the

FM 21-75
Wrap the dressing around the If more pressure is needed to stop the
wound and tie the ends securely bleeding, put a thick pad or stone on
with a square knot. If possible, top of the dressing and tie the ends
tie the knot directly over the of the dressing over the pad or stone.
wound. This is called a pressure dressing.
If the wound is in an arm or leg and
the bleeding has not stopped, raise the
If the bleeding continues after the injured limb above the level of the
dressing is secured on the wound, heart. This helps to slow down or stop
press the bandage for 5 to 10 minutes. the bleeding. Do not, however, raise a
limb with a broken bone unless it is
properly splinted.
8-11

FM 21-75
If blood is spurting from the wound, wound until a pressure dressing can be
there is bleeding from an artery. To stop put on it. In some cases, you may have
it, press on the point of the body where to keep pressure on the pressure paint
the main artery supplying the wounded even after the drawing is put on. The
area with blood is located This pres- best pressure points of the body to use
sure should shut off or slow down the in stopping arterial bleeding are shown
flow of blood from the heart to the in the following illustration.
8-12

FM 21-75
If the wound continues to bleed after 4 inches above the wound, not over it.
you apply pressure to a pressure point Never loosen or remove a tourniquet
and apply a pressure dressing, use a once it has been put on. If possible,
tourniquet. This should be a LAST mark a “T” on the casualty’s fore-
RESORT ONLY. Put the tourniquet head at the time the tourniquet is put
between the wound and where the in- on. Then get the casualty to an aid
jured limb joins the trunk. Put it 2 to station quickly.
8-13

FM 21-75
PREVENT SHOCK take small, fast breaths or gasps; stare blindly
into space or become blotchy or bluish around
Unless shock is prevented or treated, his mouth.
death may result, even though the injury would
not otherwise be fatal. After giving the casualty the first two
lifesaving measures, look for signs of shock.
Shock may result from any injury, but If the casualty is in shock or is about to go into
is more likely to result from a severe injury. shock, treat him at once for shock. To treat for
Warning signs of shock are restlessness, thirst, shock, proceed as follows:
pale skin, and rapid heartbeat. A casualty in
shock may be excited or appear calm and tired. Loosen the casualty’s clothing at the
He may be sweating when his skin feels cool neck, waist, and wherever it restricts
and clammy. As his condition worsens, he may circulation.
8-14

FM 21-75
Reassure the casualty by being calm and
self-confident. Assure him that he will be taken
care of.
Place the casualty in a comfortable posi-
tion. His position depends on his condition.
If he is conscious, place him on his back with
his feet raised 15 to 20 cm (6 to 8 in). If he is
unconscious, place him on his side or abdomen
with his head turned to the side. If he has a
head wound, raise his head higher than his body.
If he has a wound of the face and/or neck, set
him up and lean him forward with his head down
or in the position for an unconscious casualty.
If he has a sucking chest wound, set him up or
lay him down on the injured side. If he has an
abdominal wound, lay him on his back with his
head turned to the side.
Keep the casualty warm. It may be neces-
sary to place ponchos or blankets under and
over him.
DRESS AND BANDAGE
THE WOUND
The healing of wounds and recovery
depend a lot on how well you initially protect
the wound from contamination and infection.
A wound must be dressed and bandaged
to protect it from further contamination, as well
as to stop the bleeding. Use the field first-aid
dressing in the first-aid packet to dress’ and
bandage a wound. A dressing is any sterile
pad used to cover a wound. A bandage is any
material used to secure a dressing to a wound.
The field first-aid dressing already has bandages
attached to it. Use the dressing to cover a
wound and the bandages to secure the dressing
to it.
For information on how to dress and band-
age different wounds, see chapter 6, FM 21-11.
8-15

FM 21-75
DOs AND DON’Ts OF FIRST AID
When giving first aid to a casualty, re- DON’T fail to replace items used
member the following: from the first-aid case.
DO act promptly but calmly.
PERSONAL HYGIENE
DO reassure the casualty and gently
Personal hygiene consists of practices
examine him to determine the needed
which safeguard your health and that of others.
first aid.
It is often thought of as being the same as per-
DO give lifesaving measures as re- sonal cleanliness. While cleanliness is important,
quired. it is only one part of healthy living. Personal
hygiene is important to you because:
DON’T position a soldier on his back
if he is unconscious or has a wound on
It protects against disease-causing
his face or neck.
germs that are present in all environ-
DON’T remove clothing from an ments.
injured soldier by pulling or tearing
it off. It keeps disease-causing germs from
spreading.
DON’T touch or try to clean dirty
wounds, including burns. It promotes health among soldiers.
DON’T remove dressings and band- It improves morale.
ages once they have been put on a
wound.
PERSONAL CLEANLINESS
DON’T loosen a tourniquet once it
Skin. Wash your body frequently from head to
has been applied.
foot with soap and water. If no tub or shower is
DON’T move a casualty who has a frac- available, wash with a cloth and soapy water,
ture until it has been properly splinted, paying particular attention to armpits, groin
unless it is absolutely necessary. area, face, ears, hands, and feet.
DON’T give fluids by mouth to a casu- Hair. Keep your hair clean, neatly combed, and
alty who is unconscious, nauseated, trimmed. At least once a week, wash your hair
or vomiting, or who has an abdominal and entire scalp with soap and water. Also,
or neck wound. shave as often as the water supply and tactical
situation permit. Do not share combs or shaving
DON’T permit the head of a casualty
equipment with other soldiers.
with a head injury to be lower than
his body. Hands. Wash your hands with soap and water
after any dirty work, after each visit to the
DON’T try to push protruding intes-
latrine, and before eating. Keep your fingernails
tines or brain tissue back into a wound.
closely trimmed and clean. Do not bite your
DON’T put any medication on a burn. fingernails, pick your nose, or scratch your body.
DON’T administer first-aid measures Clothing and Sleeping Gear. Wash or exchange
which are unnecessary or beyond your clothing when it becomes dirty (situation per-
ability. mitting). Wash or exchange sleeping gear when
8-16

FM 21-75
CARE OF THE FEET
it becomes dirty. If clothing and sleeping gear Wash and dry your feet daily. Use foot
cannot be washed or exchanged, shake them powder on your feet to help kill germs, reduce
and air them regularly in the sun. That greatly friction on the skin, and absorb perspiration.
reduces the number of germs on them. Socks should be changed daily. After crossing a
wet area, dry your feet, put on foot powder, and
change socks, as soon as the situation permits.
CARE OF THE MOUTH AND TEETH
Regular and proper cleaning of the mouth
and the teeth helps prevent tooth decay and
gum disease. The most healthful oral hygiene
is to clean your mouth and teeth thoroughly
and correctly after each meal with a toothbrush
and toothpaste. If a toothbrush is not available,
cut a twig from a tree and fray it on one end to
serve as a toothbrush. If mouthwash is avail-
able, use it to help kill germs in your mouth.
To help remove food from between your teeth,
use dental floss or toothpicks. Twigs can also
be used for toothpicks.
FOOD AND DRINK
For proper development, strength, and
survival, your body requires:
Proteins.
Fats and carbohydrates.
Minerals.
Vitamins.
Water.
8-17

FM 21-75
Issued rations have those essential food There are lulls in combat when you will
substances in the right amounts and proper not be active. During such lulls, exercise. That
balance. So, eat primarily those rations. When helps to keep the muscles and body functions
feasible, heat your meals. That will make them ready for the next period of combat. It also
taste better and will reduce the energy required helps pass the time in the lulls.
to digest them. Do not overindulge in sweets,
soft drinks, alcoholic beverages, and other non- REST
issued rations. Those rarely have nutritional
Your body needs regular periods of rest to
value and are often harmful.
restore physical and mental vigor. When you
Drink water only from approved water are tired, your body functions are sluggish, and
sources or after it has been treated with water- your ability to react is slower than normal. That
purification tablets. To purify water from rivers also makes you more susceptible to sickness.
or streams: For good health, 6 to 8 hours of uninterrupted
sleep each day is desirable. As that is seldom
Fill your canteen with water (be care- possible in combat, use rest periods and off-duty
ful not to get trash or other objects in time to rest or sleep. Do not be ashamed to say
your canteen). that you are tired or sleepy. Do not, however,
sleep when on duty.
Add one purification tablet per quart
of clear water or two tablets per quart MENTAL HYGIENE
of cloudy or very cold water. (If you
are out of tablets, use boiling water The way you think affects the way you
that has been boiled for 5 minutes.) act. If you know your job, you will probably act
quickly and effectively. If you are uncertain or
Replace the cap loosely.
doubtful of your ability to do your job, you may
hesitate and make wrong decisions. Positive
Wait 5 minutes.
thinking is a necessity. You must enter combat
with absolute confidence in your ability to do
Shake the canteen well and allow
your job.
some of the water to leak out.
Tighten the cap. Fear is a basic human emotion. It is both a
mental and physical state. Fear is not shameful
Wait an additional 20 minutes before if it is controlled. It can even help you by making
drinking the water. you more alert and more able to do your job.
Fear makes the pupils of your eyes enlarge,
EXERCISE which increases your field of vision so you
Exercise of the muscles and joints helps to can detect movement more easily. Fear also
maintain physical fitness and good health. increases your rate of breathing and heartbeat.
Without that, you may lack the physical That increases your strength. Therefore, control
stamina and ability to fight. Physical fitness your fear and use it to your advantage.
includes a healthy body, the capacity for skill-
ful and sustained performance, the ability to Do not let your imagination and fear run
recover from exertion rapidly, the desire to wild. Remember, you are not alone. You are part
complete a designated task, and the confidence of a team. There are other soldiers nearby, even
to face any eventuality. Your own safety, health, though they cannot always be seen. Everyone
and life may depend on your physical fitness. must help each other and depend on each other.
8-18

FM 21-75
Worry undermines the body, dulls the Wash your hands following any con-
mind, and slows down thinking and learning. tamination, before eating or preparing
It adds to confusion, magnifies troubles, and food, and before cleaning your mouth
causes you to imagine things which really do and teeth.
not exist. If you are worried about something,
Wash all mess gear after each meal.
talk to your leader about it. He may be able to
help solve the problem.
Clean your mouth and teeth at least
once each day.
You may have to fight in any part of the
world and in all types of terrain. Therefore,
Avoid insect bites by wearing proper
adjust your mind to accept conditions as they
clothing and using insect repellents.
are. If mentally prepared for it, you should be
able to fight under almost any conditions. Avoid getting wet or chilled unneces-
sarily.
RULES FOR AVOIDING ILLNESS
IN THE FIELD Don’t share personal items (canteens,
pipes, toothbrushes, washcloths,
Don’t consume foods and beverages towels, and shaving gear) with other
from unauthorized sources. soldiers.
Don’t soil the ground with urine or Don’t leave food scraps lying around.
feces. (Use a latrine or “cat-hole.”)
Sleep when possible.
Keep your fingers and contaminated
objects out of your mouth. Exercise regularly.
8-19

FM 21-75
APPENDIX A
Mines
GENERAL
A unit may use mines during security, defen-
sive, retrograde, and offensive operations in order
to reduce the enemy’s mobility. In those operations,
leaders pick the places for the mines and their men
emplace them and, when required, retrieve them (See
TM 9–1345-203-12P).
The mines you will most commonly use are:
M14, Antipersonnel
M16Al, Antipersonnel
M18Al, Antipersonnel
M26, Antipersonnel
M15, Antitank
M21, Antitank
M24, Off-Route Antitank
CONTENTS
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-1
ANTIPERSONNEL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-2
ANTITANK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-22
A-l

FM 21-75
ANTIPERSONNEL
M14, ANTIPERSONNEL MINE
This is a blast-type, high-explosive mine
with a plastic body. A pressure of 9 to 15.8kg
(20 to 35 lb) will detonate it.
To emplace an M14 mine:
Remove the mine from the packing box
and inspect it. If the mine is cracked
or otherwise damaged, do not use it.
Use the M22 wrench from the pack-
ing box to unscrew the white plastic
shipping plug from the detonator well
in the bottom of the mine. Keep the
shipping plug for possible future use.
A-2

FM 21-75
Inspect the firing pin’s position. If it
extends into the detonator well. the
mine is unsafe to use.
Inspect the detonator well for foreign
matter. If foreign matter is present,
carefully remove it by tapping the
mine against the palm of the hand.
A-3

FM 21-75
Dig a hole about 10 cm (4 in) in diam-
eter and just deep enough (about 3.8
em [1.5 in]) so that the pressure plate of
the mine will extend above the ground.
Make sure the ground at the bottom
of the hole is solid enough to support
the mine when pressure is applied to
the pressure plate. If the ground is too
soft, place a block of wood or other
solid support in the bottom of the hole.
A-4

FM 21-75
To disarm and remove an M14 mine, re- With the safety clip in place, turn the
verse the steps used to arm and emplace it. pressure plate so that the arrow points
to S (SAFE). That disarms the mine.
Inspect the area around the mine to
see if the mine has been tampered with. Remove the mine from the hole.
If it has been, do not try to disarm it.
Turn the mine over and carefully re-
Report the tampering to your leader.
move the detonator from the detonator
well.
Remove the soil from the mine without
putting pressure on the mine. Screw the plastic shipping plug into
the detonator well.
Grasp the body of the mine with one
hand and insert the safety clip with Clean off the mine and put it in a
the other. packing box.
A-5

FM 21-75
M16Al, ANTIPERSONNEL MINE
This is a bounding, fragmentation mine
with a metallic body. It can be set for pressure
detonation or set with a tripwire attached to a
release-pin ring. A pressure of 3.6 kg (8 lb) or
more against one or more of the three prongs
of the fuze, or a pull of 1.3 kg (3 lb) or more on
the tripwire, will detonate the mine.
To emplace an M16Al mine:
Remove the mine from its packing
box and inspect it for damage. If the
mine is dented, cracked, or otherwise
damaged, do not use it.
Unscrew the shipping plug from the
fuze well with the closed end of the
M25 fuze wrench. Keep the shipping
plug for future disarming of the mine,
if required.
A-6

FM 21-75
Inspect the fuse well and flash tube of the rubber gasket is around the fuse
the mine for foreign matter. If foreign base.
matter is present, turn the mine upside
down and gently tap its bottom to dis- With the open end of the wrench, make
lodge the matter. sure that the bushing adapter on the
fuze well is tight.
Set the mine down and take a fuze out
Screw the fuze assembly into the fuze
of the fuze box.
well with the fuze wrench.
Inspect the fuze for damage and for Dig a hold about 15 cm (6 in) deep and
missing safety pins. Make sure that 13 cm (5 in) in diameter.
the safety pins move freely in the
safety-pin holes. Also make sure that Put the mine in the hole.
A-7

FM 21-75
A-8

FM 21-75
A-9

FM 21-75
To disarm and remove an M16A1 mine,
reverse the steps used to arm and emplace it.
Check the mine and the area around it
to see if the mine has been tampered
with.
If it has been, do not try to disarm it.
Report the tampering to your leader.
Uncover the top of the mine.
Insert the positive safety pin through
the positive safety pin hole.
Insert the locking safety pin through
the locking safety pin hole opposite
the release-pin ring.
Insert the interlocking safety pin be-
tween the positive safety pin and
locking safety pin.
If tripwires are attached to the release-
pin ring, cut all of them after the
safety pins have been inserted.
Remove the dirt from around the mine
and then lift the mine out of the hole.
Unscrew and remove the fuze assembly.
Replace the plastic shipping plug in
the fuze well.
Replace the mine and fuze in the pack-
ing box.
M18Al, ANTIPERSONNEL MINE
(CLAYMORE)
This is a curved, rectangular mine con-
taining C4 explosive and 700 steel balls. It can
be fired electrically or nonelectrically.
The Claymore projects 700 steel balls in
a fan-shaped pattern about 2 meters (6.6 ft)
high and 60 degrees wide to a range of 50 meters
(165 ft). These balls are effective as far as 100
meters (328 ft) and are dangerous up to 250
meters (825 ft) forward of the mine.
A-10

FM 21-75
To emplace a Claymore for command
detonation:
Remove the electrical firing wire, the Position the firing-device safety bail
firing device, and test set from the in the FIRE position and squeeze the
bandoleer. Do not take the mine out firing-device handle with a firm, quick
of the bandoleer. squeeze.
A-11

FM 21-75
A-12

FM 21-75
A-13
161-017 0 - 94 - 5

FM 21-75
Disconnect the firing wire from the
firing device and replace the dust
covers.
Move to the mine and unscrew and
remove the shipping-plug priming
adapter from it. Take the firing device
with you.
Remove the blasting cap from the
shipping-plug priming adapter and
then screw the adapter back into the
detonator well.
Put the blasting cap inside its card-
board container, remove the firing wire
from the stake, and reroll the firing
wire.
Pick up the mine and put it in the
bandoleer.
Remove the firing wire from the stake
at the firing position and put it in the
bandoleer.
To emplace a Claymore with a tripwire:
To disarm and remove a Claymore, reverse
Emplace and aim the mine to cover
arming and emplacing procedure.
the desired kill zone.
Make sure that the firing-device safety Put an anchor stake (1) about 1 meter
bail is in the SAFE position. (3.3 ft) to the rear of the mine and
attach the firing wire to it, leaving
about 1.5 meters (5 ft) of slack. Do not
insert the blasting cap into the mine
at this time.
Unroll the firing wire to a point about
20 meters (66 ft) to either the left or
right front of the mine. Put an anchor
stake (2) at that point.
Attach a clothespin (or other impro-
vised device) to stake (2) with its closed
end pointing toward the kill zone. The
clothespin can be tied or nailed to the
stake.
Move across the kill zone and put in
another stake (3).
Attach the trip wire to stake (3) and
unroll the tripwire to stake (2).
A-14

FM 21-75
Attach the end of the tripwire to a connection to the clothespin by cut-
C-ration plastic spoon or some other ting one strand of the firing wire and
nonconductor of electricity. Connect forming two bare wire loops that can
the tripwire and spoon before setting fit over the ends of the clothespin.
up the mine. (Do that before setting up the mine.)
Prepare the firing wire at stake (2) for
A-15

FM 21-75
Slide the loops over the ends of the the shipping-plug priming adapter,
clothespin and tighten them to fit in and recheck the aim.
the grooves of the clothespin.
Move to stake (4) to attach the firing
Insert the tripwire spoon into the jaws wire to the power source.
of the clothespin. The tripwire should
be about ankle-high and not too tight. Cut the shorting plug and dust cover
from the end of the firing wire and re-
Unroll the firing wire to a site to the move about 2.54 cm (1 in) of insulation
rear of the mine and put in another from each strand of the firing wire.
anchor stake (4).
Twist the ends of the wires and attach
Attach the firing wire to stake (4). them to a power source (BA 206 or
BA 4386 battery or any other power
Move to the mine, insert the blasting source that produces at least 2 volts of
cap into the detonating well, screw in electricity). The system is now ready.
To disarm and remove a Claymore with a Place the mine in the bandoleer.
tripwire, reverse the steps used- to arm and
install it. Roll up the firing wire and recover the
other items, going from stake (1) to
Disconnect the firing wire from the
(2), (2) to (3), and (3) to (4).
power.
Remove the blasting cap from the mine Put all of the accessories in the bando-
and place the cap in its protective cover. leer and move back to your position.
A-16

FM 21-75
M26, ANTIPERSONNEL MINE
This is a small, bounding, fragmentation
mine. It can be set for either pressure or trip-
wire activation. A pressure of 13 kg (28 lb) on
top of the mine, or a pull against the tripwire
will detonate it.
To emplace an M26 mine for pressure
detonation:
Dig a hole in the ground about 13 cm
(5 in) deep and wide enough to accept
the mine.
Remove a 2.5 cm (1 in) layer of dirt out
to about 15 cm (6 in) from around the
mine to allow knuckle clearance needed
when turning the arming handle.
A-17

FM 21-75
NOTE: Leave the tripwire spool assembly
attached to the mine This helps to stabi-
lize the mine in the hole.
Remove the arming handle from the
tripwire spool by pulling it upward
from the spool.
Close the spread ends of the arming-
latch retaining pin (cotter pin) to aid
its removal after the mine is emplaced.
Place the mine in the hole, with cover
end up, so that the mine cover lugs ex-
tend just slightly above ground level.
A-18

FM 21-75
Pack the dirt around the mine, leaving To disarm and remove an M26 mine set
the cover lugs exposed. for pressure detonation, reverse the steps used
to arm and install the mine.
Remove the arming-latch retaining pin
by pulling the ring straight up. Carefully remove all camouflage from
around the top of the mine.
Attach the arming handle to the lugs
on the arming latch. Hold the mine If there is any sign of boobytrapping
firmly with the thumb and finger of or tampering, do not try to disarm and
one hand to keep it from turning. Turn remove the mine. Instead, destroy the
the cover clockwise (about ¼ turn) mine in place.
until it stops.
If there are no signs of boobytrapping
The arrow on the mine cover should be or tampering, replace the arming latch
slightly past the center of the red A by sliding it under the arming handle
(armed) position. lugs from the side opposite the arrow.
Camouflage the mine. Make sure that the middle prong of
the arming latch engages the trip-
Remove the arming latch from the lever cam.
mine by pulling straight out on the
arming handle. Keep the arming latch Remove a 2.5 cm (1 in) layer of dirt out
and arming handle for future use. The to about 15 cm (6 in) from the edge of
mine is now armed. the mine to allow knuckle clearance.
Attach the arming handle to the arm-
ing latch.
Hold the mine with one hand and turn
the cover counterclockwise with your
other hand until it stops (about ¼
turn).
The arrow on the cover should line
up with the S (SAFE) position on the
mine.
Remove the arming handle.
Insert the arming-latch retaining pin
through the holes in the arming latch
and mine body. (It may be necessary
to rotate the latch back about ½ cm
[¼ in] to align the holes.)
Remove the mine from the hole.
Clear the mine and repackage it.
A-19

FM 21-75
To emplace an M26 mine for tripwire by pulling it away from the mine body.
detonation:
Remove the arming handle from the
Dig a hole in the ground about 13 cm tripwire spool by pulling it upward.
(5 in) deep and wide enough for the
mine. Unscrew and remove the trip lever
from the tripwire spool.
Remove a 2.5 cm (1 in) layer of dirt out
to about 15 cm (6 in) from around the Remove one or more tripwires, as
mine to allow knuckle clearance needed required, from the tripwire spool by
when turning the arming handle. pressing in on the plastic tripwire
retainer(s) and lifting the tripwire(s)
Remove the tripwire spool assembly off the top of the spool.
Retain or replace any unused trip- Place the mine in the hole with the
wires on the spool. cover end up, so that the mine cover
lugs extend just slightly above ground
Replace the tripwire spool assembly level.
on the mine. Leave the spool on the
Pack the dirt around the mine, leaving
mine to help stabilize it.
the cover lugs exposed.
Close the spread ends of arming-latch Screw the trip lever about four turns
retaining pin (cotter pin) to aid its into the trip-lever cam (in the top cen-
removal after the mine is emplaced. ter of the mine cover) until it is tight.
A-20

FM 21-75
To disarm and remove an M26 mine
emplaced for tripwire detonation, reverse
the steps used to arm and install the tripwire
detonation.
Carefully remove all camouflage from
around the mine.
If there is any evidence of boobytrap-
ping or tampering, do not try to disarm
and remove the mine. Take care not to
move the trip lever or press on the
mine cover.
Replace the arming latch. With the
two raised arming handle lugs facing
upward, slide the arming latch under
the six lugs of the mine cover from the
side opposite the arrow. Make sure
that the middle prong of the arming
latch engages the trip-lever cam.
Remove a layer of dirt about 2.5 cm
Cut the tape holding the coils of wire.
(1 in) deep for a distance of about 15
Attach the loop end(s) of the tripwire(s) cm (6 in) from the edge of the mine to
to the loop of the trip lever. allow knuckle clearance for turning
and removing the arming latch.
Leaving some slack, attach the other
end of the tripwire(s) to a firm anchor Attach the arming handle to the lugs
stake(s). on the arming latch.
Remove the arming-latch retaining pin Hold the mine with one hand and turn
by pulling the ring straight up. the mine cover counterclockwise with
your other hand until it stops (about ¼
Assemble the arming handle to the turn). The arrow on the cover should
lugs on the arming latch. Hold the point to the S (SAFE) position on the
mine body firmly with your thumb and mine body.
finger of one hand to keep the mine
from turning. Rotate the cover clock- Remove the arming handle from the
wise (from S to A) until it stops (about mine and keep it for future use.
¼ turn).
Insert the arming-latch retaining pin
Camouflage the mine. through the holes in the arming latch
and mine body. It may be necessary to
Remove the arming latch from the turn the latch back (up to ½ cm [¼ in])
mine by pulling straight out on the to align the holes of the latch and body.
arming handle. Keep the arming latch
and arming handle for future use. The Remove the mine from the ground.
mine is now armed. Clean the mine and repackage it.
A-21

FM 21-75
ANTITANK
M15, ANTITANK MINE
This antitank mine has a cylindrical steel
body. It is pressure detonated. A force of 159
to 340 kg (350 to 750 lb) on the pressure plate
will detonate the mine.
To emplace an M15 mine:
Remove the mine from its packing box.
Using the M20 wrench, unscrew the
arming plug by turning it counter-
clockwise. Take it out of the mine.
Inspect the fuze well for foreign
matter. Remove any found.
A-22

FM 21-75
detonator shows in the bottom of the
fuze and that the safety clip is in place
between the pressure plate and the
body of the fuze.
Make sure that the booster retainer is
seated in the fuze well. If it is missing,
replace the mine.
Put the mine down and pick up the
metal fuze container.
Open the container with the key
attached to its bottom.
Remove the fuze from the container.
Make sure that the green end of the
A-23

FM 21-75
Remove the safety fork from between Check the clearance of the pressure
the pressure plate and the body of the plate of the fuze in the fuze well by
fuze. Keep the safety fork for future use. using the tab end of the M20 wrench.
If the pressure plate is too high, the
button on the plate will interfere with
the movement of the arming shutter
in arming the mine. If the fuze does
not fully seat, remove it and replace
it with another fuze.
Pick up the arming plug M4 and turn
the setting knob to the SAFE posi-
tion — if it is not already on SAFE.
Insert the fuze into the fuze well.
Make sure that the fuze is seated
securely on top of the booster retainer.
Put no-pressure on the pressure plate
when handling the fuze.
A-24

FM 21-75
Dig a hole about 38 cm (15 in) in diam- Lay the mine in the hole so that the
eter and 15 cm (16 in) deep, with walls top surface of the pressure plate is
sloping 45 degrees. about 3 cm (11/2 in) below ground level.
Fill in the dirt around the mine and
Check the bottom of the hole to make
pat it down.
sure that the ground is solid so that
Using the M20 wrench, arm the mine
the mine will not sink into the ground.
by turning the setting knob from
If it is not solid, insert a wooden board
SAFE through DANGER to ARMED.
or other support to give the mine a
firm foundation. Camouflage the mine.
A-25

FM 21-75
Turn the arming plug counterclock-
To disarm and remove an M15 mine,
wise with the M20 wrench and remove
reverse the steps used to arm and install it.
it from the mine.
Carefully remove all camouflage from
Remove the fuze from the fuze well.
around the mine. Look for boobytraps
and other signs of tampering. If there Insert the safety fork under the pres-
are signs of tampering or boobytraps, sure plate and place the fuze in a
destroy the mine in place. secure container.
If there are no signs of tampering or Put the arming plug in the fuze well.
boobytraps, Slowly turn the setting
Remove the mine from the hole and
knob from ARMED through DANGER
put it in the packing box.
to SAFE. Use the M20 wrench.
A-26

FM 21-75
M21, ANTITANK MINE
This antitank mine has a cylindrical steel
body. It is pressure detonated. A pressure of 1.7
kg (3.75 lb) against the tilt rod (causing the rod to
tilt 20 degrees or more) will detonate the mine.
When not using the tilt rod, a pressure of 131.5 kg
(290 lb) on the pressure ring will detonate the mine.
To emplace an M21 mine:
Remove the mine and its components
from the packing box.
Inspect the mine and components for
serviceability. Check for cracks, dents,
or other signs of damage. If a damaged
item is found, replace it.
A-27

FM 21-75
Make sure that the cotter pins of the
fuze pull-ring assembly and the fuze clo-
sure assembly are in place and secure.
Turn the mine bottom up and, with the
screwdriver end of the M26 wrench,
remove the closing plug assembly by
turning it counterclockwise.
A-28

FM 21-75
Inspect the booster cavity for foreign clockwise until tight. The gasket of
matter. Remove any found. the closing-plug assembly should be
against the booster.
Insert the M120 booster (with the
washer side toward the fuze) into the Turn the mine bottom down.
booster cavity.
With the M26 wrench, remove the
With the M26 wrench, replace the shipping-plug assembly from the fuze
hole of the mine.
closing-plug assembly by turning it
A-29

FM 21-75
Inspect the fuze hole. If foreign matter
With the closure end of the M26
wrench, remove the closure assembly
from the M607 fuze. The gasket on the
bottom of the fuze should stay in place.
A-30

FM 21-75
Screw the fuze hand-tight into the If the mine is being set for pressure detona-
threaded fuze hole of the mine charge tion with the pressure rings, do not use the
cap. Set the mine down. extension rod. Instead:
Remove the pull ring assembly band
and stop on the fuze. This arms the
mine.
Keep the above items for future use, if
needed, to disarm the fuze.
Camouflage the mine.
To disarm and remove an M21 mine, re-
verse the steps used to arm and install it.
Check the area for boobytraps or any
signs of tampering. If there are booby-
traps or signs of tampering, destroy
the mine in place.
If there are no boobytraps or signs of
tampering, remove the camouflage
material from around the mine.
Reassemble the band, stop, and pull-
ring assembly on the fuze so that the
Dig a hole in the ground 30 cm (12 in) pressure ring is immobilized. When the
in diameter and 15 cm (6 in) deep. cotter pin is in place, spread the ends
so that it is not easily removable.
Check the bottom of the hole to make
Remove the extension rod and the
sure that the ground is solid and has
extension-rod adapter, if present. Be
a firm, flat foundation for the mine
careful not to damage them.
to rest on. If the ground is soft, the
mine may tilt and lose effectiveness.
Remove the dirt from around the mine
and remove the mine from the hole.
In soft ground, place a board or other
flat object under the mine as a firm Remove the fuze from the mine and in-
foundation. stall the closure assembly on the fuze.
Place the mine in the hole. Install the shipping-plug assembly into
the fuze hole of the mine.
Press the ground firmly against the
Turn the mine bottom up and remove
sides of the mine, leaving the fuze
the closing-plug assembly.
uncovered.
Remove the booster, then reinstall the
Screw the extension rod into the
closing-plug assembly with the gasket
threaded pressure ring of the fuze. toward the booster cavity.
Make sure that the extension rod is Put the mine, fuze, and components in
vertical. their original container.
A-31

FM 21-75
M24, OFF-ROUTE ANTITANK MINE
This is a remotely detonated mine system. TANK) rocket to be launched from an “off-
It is activated by vehicles running over a linear route” launch position. The launcher should be
switch (called a discriminator) which causes a between 3 and 30 meters (10 to 100 feet) from
3.5-inch HEAT (HIGH EXPLOSIVE ANTI- the edge of the path.
A-32

FM 21-75
APPENDIX B
Demolitions
GENERAL
There will be times when you have to use demo-
litions for:
Breaching minefield.
Breaching wire obstacles.
Clearing landing zones.
Blowing holes in walls of buildings.
Blowing down trees to create obstacles.
HOW TO PREPARE
FIRING SYSTEMS
CONTENTS
Information on the preparation and place-
ment of demolition charges is in FM 5-25 and in GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .B-1
GTA 5-10-27. This appendix covers the prepara-
tion of firing systems that are basic to all HOW TO PREPARE
demolition work. There are two types of firing FIRING SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .B-1
systems – NONELECTRIC SYSTEM and
ELECTRIC SYSTEM.
B-1

FM 21-75
NONELECTRIC SYSTEM
To prepare a nonelectric firing system,
take these steps:
STEP 1. Clear the cap well of a block
of TNT or push a hole about the size
of a blasting cap (3 cm [1% in] deep
and .65 cm [¼ in] in diameter) in a
block of C4 explosive.
STEP 2. To help prevent a misfire,
cut and discard 15-cm (6-in) length
of fuse from the free end of the time
blasting fuse. That part of the fuse
may have absorbed some moisture
from the air through the exposed
powder in the end of the fuse.
B-2

FM 21-75
STEP 3. Determine what length of
fuse is needed. To do this, first compute
the burning time of a 91.4-cm (3-ft) sec-
tion of fuse. Divide this burning time
by 3 to find the burning time of 30.5 cm
(1 ft) of fuse. Next, determine the time
it takes to reach a safe distance from
the explosion. Now divide the time re-
quired to reach that distance by the
burn time of 30.5 cm (1 ft) of fuse. This
will give the number of centimeters
(ft) of fuse needed.
STEP 4. Inspect the nonelectric blast-
ing cap to make sure it is clear of
foreign matter.
STEP 5. Gently slip the blasting cap
over the fuse so that the flash charge
in the cap is in contact with the end of
the time fuse. DO NOT FORCE THE
FUSE INTO THE CAP.
STEP 6. After seating the cap, crimp
it 3.2 mm (1/8 in) from the open end of
the cap. Hold it out and away from
your body when crimping.
B-3

FM 21-75
STEP 7. When using TNT, insert the
blasting cap into the cap well. When
using C4, place the cap into the hole
made in the C4 and mold the C4 around
the cap. DO NOT FORCE THE CAP
INTO-THE HOLE.
STEP 8. Insert the free end of the fuse
into an M60 fuse igniter and secure it in
place by screwing on the fuse holder cap.
B-4

FM 21-75
STEP 9. To fire the fuse igniter, re- STEP 11. Then light the inserted match
move the safety pin, hold the barrel in head with a burning match or strike
one hand. Take up the slack, before the inserted match head on a matchbox.
making the final strong pull. If the fuse
igniter misfires, reset it by pushing the If the fuse burns but the explosive charge
plunger all the way in. Then try to fire does not go off, there is a misfire. Wait 30
it as before. If it still misfires, replace it. minutes before trying to clear it. If the misfire
charge was not tamped (nothing packed around
STEP 10. If a fuse igniter is not avail- it), lay another charge of at least one block of
able, split the end of the fuse and place C4 or TNT beside it. If it was tamped, place at
the head of an unlighted match in the least two blocks of C4 or TNT beside it. Do not
split. Make sure the match head is move the misfire charge. The detonation of the
touching the powder train. new charge should detonate the misfire charge.
B-5

FM 21-75
ELECTRIC SYSTEM
To prepare an electric firing system, take
these steps:
STEP 1. After finding a safe firing
position and a place for the charge,
lay out the firing wire from the charge
position to the firing position. Before
leaving the charge position, anchor
the firing wire to something. Always
keep the firing device with you. Do
not leave it at the firing position.
STEP 2. Check the firing wire with the
galvanometers or circuit taster to make
sure it does not have a short circuit or
a break. This is best done with one
man at each end of the firing wire.
To check for a short, separate the
two strands (the bare ends) of the
firing wire at the firing position.
B-6

FM 21-75
Have the other soldier do the same
thing with the other end of the wire
at the charge position. At the firing
position, touch the bare ends of the
two strands to the galvanometer/cir-
cuit tester posts. The needle on the
galvanometers should not move, nor
should the light on the circuit tester
come on. If the needle does not move
or if the light does not come on, the
wire has a break — replace it.
If the wire has no short when tested,
test it for a break. Have the soldier
at the charge position twist the
bare ends of the strands together.
Then touch the two strands at the
firing position to the galvanometers/
circuit tester posts. That should
cause a wide deflection of the gal-
vanometer needle or cause the
circuit tester light to come on. If
the galvanometers needle does not
move or if the light does not come
on, the wire has a break — replace it.
.
B-7

FM 21-75
STEP 3. At the firing position, check
of C4 plastic explosive, push a hole in
the blasting cap with a galvanometers
it about the size of a blasting cap.
or circuit tester to make sure it does
not have a short. Remove the short
circuit shunt and touch one cap lead
wire using the galvanometers, the needle
should make a wide deflection. If it
does, the cap is good.
If the needle fails to move or only
makes a slight deflection, replace
the cap.
STEP 5. Position the charge. Then
splice the lead wires of the cap to the
firing wire (pigtail knot).
When using the circuit tester, the
light should come on when the
handle is squeezed. If it does not,
replace the cap.
STEP 4. Move to the charge position
and, if the charge is a block of TNT,
clear its cap well if the charge is a block
B-8

FM 21-75
STEP 6. Insert the cap into the cap
well of the TNT and secure it with the
priming adapter, or insert the cap into
the hole made in the C4 and mold the
explosive around the cap.
STEP 7. Move back to the firing posi-
tion and check the wire circuit with
the galvanometers or circuit tester
(same technique as described earlier).
If the circuit checked out and the blasting
machine does not set off the charge, there is a
misfire.
If an untamped charge misfires, inves-
tigate at once. If the charge is tamped, wait
30 minutes before investigating, then take
these steps:
STEP 1. Check the firing wire connec-
tion to the blasting machine to be sure
that the contacts are good.
STEP 2. Make two or three more
attempts to fire the charge.
B -9

FM 21-75
STEP 3. Try to fire it again using new charge. This should also detonate
another blasting machine. the misfire charge.
STEP 4. Disconnect the firing wire
from the blasting machine and shunt
(twist together) the ends of the wire.
STEP 5. Move to the charge position
to investigate. Take the blasting
machine with you.
STEP 6. Check the entire circuit, in-
cluding the firing wire, for breaks and
short circuits.
STEP 7. Make no attempt to remove
the primer or the charge.
STEP 8. If the fault has not been
found, place a new primed charge
beside the misfire charge.
STEP 9. Disconnect the old blasting
cap wires from the firing wire and shunt
the ends of the blasting cap wires.
STEP 10. Attach the new blasting cap
wires to the firing wire and fire the
B-10

FM 21-75
APPENDIX C
Obstacles
GENERAL
In combat, enemy units use obstacles to stop
or slow their opponent’s movement. Because of
that, you may have to bypass or breach (make a gap
through) those obstacles in order to continue your
mission.
Two basic obstacles used by the enemy are
minefield and wire obstacles. This appendix gives
guidance on breaching and crossing minefield and
wire obstacles.
CONTENTS
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-1
HOW TO BREACH AND
CROSS A MINEFIELD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-2
HOW TO BREACH AND
CROSS WIRE OBSTACLES . . . . . . . . . . . . C-5
C-l

FM 21-75
HOW TO BREACH AND CROSS
A MINEFIELD
There are many ways to breach a mine- Place the unsharpened end of the probe
field. One way is to probe for and mark mines in the palm of one hand with your
to clear a footpath through the minefield. fingers extended and your thumb hold-
ing the probe.
PROBING FOR MINES
Probe every 5 cm (2 in) across a l-meter
Remove your helmet, load-carrying front. Push the probe gently into the
equipment (LCE), watch, rings, belt, ground at an angle less than 45 degrees.
dog tags, and anything else that may
hinder movement or fall off. Kneel (or lie down) and feel upward
and forward with your free hand to
Leave your rifle and equipment with find tripwires and pressure prongs
another soldier in the team. before starting to probe.
Get a wooden stick about 30 cm (12 in) Put just enough pressure on the probe
long for a probe and sharpen one of to sink it slowly into the ground. If
the ends. Do not use a metal probe. the probe does not go into the ground.
C-2

FM 21-75
pick or chip the dirt away with the
probe and remove it by hand.
Stop probing when a solid object is
touched.
Remove enou—gh dirt from around the
object to find out what it is.
MARKING THE MINE
Remove enough dirt from around it
to see what type of mine it is.
Mark it and report its exact location
to your leader. There are several ways
to mark a mine. How it is marked is
not as important as having everyone
understand the marking. A common
way to mark a mine is to tie a piece
of paper, cloth, or engineer tape to a
stake and put the stake in the ground
by the mine.
C-3
161-017 0 - 94 - 6

FM 21-75
CROSSING THE MINEFIELD
Once a footpath has been probed and the
mines marked, a security team should cross the
minefield to secure the far side. After the far
side is secure, the rest of the unit should cross.
C-4

FM 21-75
HOW TO BREACH AND CROSS
WIRE OBSTACLES
The enemy uses wire obstacles to separate Cut the wire near a picket. To reduce
infantry from tanks and to slow or stop in- the noise of a cut, have another soldier
fantry. His wire obstacles are similar to ours. wrap cloth around the wire and hold
To breach them, you should use wire cutters the wire with both hands. Cut part of
and bangalore torpedoes. the way through the wire between the
other soldier’s hands and have him
Breaching a wire obstacle may require bend the wire back and forth until it
stealth; for example, when done by a patrol. breaks. If you are alone, wrap cloth
It may not require stealth during an attack. around the wire near a picket, partially
Breaches requiring stealth are normally done cut the wire, and then bend and break
with wire cutters. Other breaches are normally the wire.
done with bangalore torpedoes and wire cutters.
To breach an obstacle made of concertina:
CUTTING THE WIRE
Cut the wire and stake it back to keep
To cut through a wire obstacle with the breach open.
stealth
Stake the wire back far enough to
Cut only the lower strands and leave allow room to crawl through or under
the top strand in place. That makes it the obstacle.
less likely that the enemy will discover
the gap.
C-5

FM 21-75
CROSSING THE WIRE
Tocrawl under a wire obstacle:
Slide headfirst on your back.
Push forward with your heels.
Carry your weapon lengthwise on your
body and steady it with one hand. To
keep the wire from snagging on your
clothes and equipment, let it slide
along your weapon.
Feel ahead with your free hand to find
the next strand of wire and any trip
wires or mines.
To cross over a wire obstacle:
Stay crouched down low.
Feel and look for tripwires and mines.
Grasp the first wire strand lightly, and
cautiously lift one leg over the wire.
C-6

FM 21-75
Lower your foot to the ground.
Lift your other foot over the wire and
lower it to the ground.
Release the wire and feel for the next
strand.
To speed up a crossing, put boards
or grass mats over the wire and cross
on them.
USING A BANGALORE TORPEDO
A bangalore torpedo comes in a kit that
has 10 torpedo sections, 10 connecting sleeves,
and 1 nose sleeve. Use only the number of tor-
pedo sections and connecting sleeves needed.
All torpedo sections have a threaded cap
well at each end so that they may be assembled
in any order. Use the connecting sleeves to con-
nect the torpedo sections together. To prevent
early detonation of the entire bangalore torpedo
if you hit a mine while pushing it through the
obstacle, attach an improvised (wooden) torpedo
section to its end. That section can be made out
of any wooden pole or stick that is the size of
a real torpedo section. Attach the nose sleeve
to the end of the wooden section.
C-7

FM 21-75
After the bangalore torpedo has been
assembled and pushed through the obstacle,
prime it with either an electric or nonelectric
firing system (app B).
Once the bangalore torpedo has been fired,
use wire cutters to cut away any wire not cut
by the explosion.
C-8

FM 21-75
APPENDIX D
Urban Areas
GENERAL
Successful combat operations in urban areas
require skills that are unique to this type of fighting.
This appendix discusses some of those skills. For a
more detailed discussion, see FM 90-10-1.
HOW TO MOVE
Movement in urban areas is a fundamental
skill that you must master. To minimize expo-
sure to enemy fire while moving:
CONTENTS
Do not silhouette yourself, stay low,
avoid open areas such as streets, GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. D-1
alleys, and parks.
HOW TO MOVE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..D-1
Select your next covered position be-
fore moving.
HOW TO ENTER
A BUILDING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. D-7
Conceal your movements by using
smoke, buildings, rubble, or foliage.
HOW TO USE
Move rapidly from one position to HAND GRENADES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..D-10
another.
HOW TO USE
Do not mask your overwatching/ FIGHTING POSITIONS . . . . . . . D-10
covering fire when you move; and stay
alert and ready.
D-l

FM 21-75
HOW TO CROSS A WALL
Always cross a wall rapidly. But first, find
a low spot to cross and visually reconnoiter
the other side of the wall to see if it is clear of
obstacles and the enemy. Next, quickly roll
over the wall, keeping a low silhouette. The
rapid movement and low silhouette keep the
enemy from getting a good shot at you.
HOW TO MOVE AROUND
A CORNER
Before moving around a corner, check out
the area beyond it to see if it is clear of obstacles
and the enemy. Do not expose yourself when
checking out that area. Lie flat on the ground
and do not expose your weapon beyond the cor-
ner. With your steel helmet on, look around the
corner at ground level only enough to see around
it. Do not expose your head any more than
necessary. If there are no obstacles or enemy
present, stay low and move around the corner.
D-2

FM 21-75
HOW TO MOVE PAST A WINDOW
When moving past a window on the first
floor of a building, stay below the window level.
Take care not to silhouette yourself in the win-
dow, and stay close to the side of the building.
D-3

FM 21-75
HOW TO MOVE PARALLEL TO
A BUILDING
When moving past a window in a base- When you must move parallel to a building,
ment, use the same basic techniques used in use smoke for concealment and have someone
passing a window on the first floor. However, to overwatch your move. Stay close to the side
instead of staying below the window, step or of the building. Use shadows if possible, and
jump over it without exposing your legs. stay low. Move quickly from covered position
to covered position.
HOW TO CROSS OPEN AREAS
Whenever possible, you should avoid kill
zones such as streets, alleys, and parks. They
are natural kill zones for enemy machine guns.
When you must cross an open area, do it quickly.
Use the shortest route across the area. Use
smoke to conceal your move and have someone
overwatch you.
If you must go from point A to point C,
as depicted in the illustration, do not move
from point A straight to point C. This is the
longest route across the open area and gives
the enemy more time to track and hit you.
D-4

FM 21-75
Instead of going from point A straight Once on the other side of the open area,
to point C, select a place (point B) to move to, move to point C using the techniques already
using the shortest route across the open area. discussed.
D-5

FM 21-75
HOW TO MOVE IN A BUILDING
When moving in a building, do not sil-
houette yourself in doors and windows. Move
past them as discussed for outside movement.
If forced to use a hallway, do not present
a large target to the enemy. Hug the wall and
get out of the hallway quickly.
D-6

FM 21-75
HOW TO ENTER A BUILDING
When entering a building, take every pre- Quickly follow the explosion of the
caution to get into it with minimum exposure hand grenade.
to enemy fire and observation. Some basic
rules are: Have your buddy overwatch you as
you enter the building.
Select an entry point before moving.
Enter at the highest level possible.
Avoid windows and doors.
HIGH LEVEL ENTRIES
Use smoke for concealment.
The preferred way to clear a building is to
Make new entry points by using clear from the top down. That is why you should
demolitions or tank rounds. enter at the highest level possible. If a defending
enemy is forced down to the ground level, he
Throw a hand grenade through the may leave the building, thus exposing himself
entry point before entering. to the fires outside the building.
D-7

FM 21-75
If the enemy is forced up to the top floor,
he may fight even harder than normal or
escape over the roofs of other buildings.
You can use ropes, ladders, drain pipes,
vines, helicopters, or the roofs and windows of
adjoining buildings to reach the top floor or
roof of a building. In some cases, you can climb
onto another soldier’s shoulders and pull your-
self up. You can attach a grappling hook to one
end of a rope and throw the hook to the roof,
where it can snag something to hold the rope
in place.
D-8

FM 21-75
LOW LEVEL ENTRIES
There will be times when you can’t enter
from an upper level or the roof. In such cases,
entry at the ground floor may be your only way
to get into the building. When making low level
entries, avoid entries through windows and
doors as much as possible. They are often
booby trapped and are probably covered by
enemy fire.
When making low level entries, use demo-
litions, artillery, tanks, antitank weapons,
or similar means to make an entry point in a
wall. Before entering the entry point, throw
a cooked-off hand grenade through the entry
point to reinforce the effects of the first blast.
D-9

FM 21-75
HOW TO USE HAND
GRENADES
When fighting in built-up areas, use When you throw a hand grenade into an
hand grenades to clear rooms, hallways, and opening, stay close to the building, using it for
buildings. Throw a hand grenade before enter- cover. Before you throw the hand grenade, select
ing a door, window, room, hall, stairwell, or a safe place to move to in case the hand grenade
any other entry point. Before throwing a hand does not go into the opening or in case the
grenade, let it cook off for 2 seconds. That enemy throws it back. Once you throw the hand
keeps the enemy from throwing it back before grenade, take cover. After the hand grenade
it explodes. explodes, move into the building quickly.
To cook off a hand grenade remove your
HOW TO USE FIGHTING
thumb from the safety lever; allow the lever to
POSITIONS
rotate out and away from the grenade; then
count one thousand one, one thousand two, and Fighting positions in urban areas are
throw it. different from those in other types of terrain.
They are not always prepared as discussed in
The best way to put a grenade into an
chapter 2. In some cases, you must use hasty
upper-story opening is to use a grenade launcher.
fighting positions which are no more than what-
ever cover is available.
CORNERS OF BUILDINGS
When using a corner of a building as a
fighting position, you must be able to fire from
either shoulder. Fire from the shoulder that lets
you keep your body close to the wall of the build-
ing and expose as little of yourself as possible.
If possible, fire from the prone position.
D-10

FM 21-75
WALLS
When firing from behind a wall, fire around
it if possible, not over it. Firing around it re-
duces the chance of being seen by the enemy.
Always stay low, close to the wall, and fire from
the shoulder that lets you stay behind cover.
WINDOWS
When using a window as a fighting posi-
tion, do not use a standing position, as it exposes
most of your body. Standing may also silhou-
ette you against a light-colored interior wall or
a window on the other side of the building. Do
not let the muzzle of your rifle extend beyond
the window, as that may give away your posi-
tion. The enemy may see the muzzle or the
flash of the rifle.
D-11

FM 21-75
The best way to fire from a window is to
get well back into the room. That prevents the
muzzle or flash from being seen. Kneel to
reduce exposure.
PEAKS OF ROOFS
A peak of a roof can provide a vantage
point and cover for a fighting position. It is
especially good for a sniper position. When
firing from a rooftop, stay low and do not sil-
houette yourself.
To improve the cover provided by a win-
dow, barricade the window but leave a small hole
to fire through. Also barricade other windows
around your position. That keeps the enemy
from knowing which windows are being used for
fighting positions. Use boards from the interior
walls of the building or any other material to
barricade the window. The barricade material
should be put on in an irregular pattern so that
the enemy cannot determine which window is
being used.
Place sandbags below and on the sides of
the window to reinforce it and to add cover.
Remove all the glass in the window to prevent
injury from flying glass.
D-12

FM 21-75
A chimney, smokestack, or any other
structure extending from a roof can provide a
base behind which you can prepare a position.
If possible, remove some of the roofing material
so that you can stand inside the building on
a beam or platform with only your head and
shoulders above the roof. Use sandbags to pro-
vide extra cover.
D-13

FM 21-75
If there are no structures extending from
a roof, prepare the position from underneath
the roof and on the enemy side. Remove enough
of the roofing material to let you see and cover
your sector through it. Use sandbags to add
cover. Stand back from the opening and do
not let the muzzle or flash of your rifle show
through the hole. The only thing that should be
noticeable to the enemy is the missing roofing
material.
D-14

FM 21-75
LOOPHOLES
A loophole blown or cut in a wall provides To reinforce a loophole and add cover, put
cover for a fighting position. Using loopholes sandbags around it. If you will be firing from a
reduces the number of windows that have to be prone position on the second floor, put sand-
used. Cut or blow several loopholes in a wall so bags on the floor to lie on. That will protect
the enemy cannot tell which one you are using. you from explosions on the first floor. Use a
When using a loophole, stay back from it. Do table with sandbags on it or some other sturdy
not let the muzzle or flash of your rifle show structure to provide overhead cover. That will
through it. protect you from falling debris.
D-15

FM 21-75
APPENDIX E
Tracking
GENERAL
In all operations, you must be alert for signs of
enemy activity. Such signs can often alert you to an
enemy’s presence and give your unit time to prepare
for contact. The ability to track an enemy after he
has broken contact also helps you regain contact
with him.
TRACKER QUALITIES Tracking is a precise art. You need a lot
of practice to achieve and keep a high level
Visual tracking is following the path of of tracking skill. You should be familiar with
men or animals by the signs they leave, pri- the general techniques of tracking to enable you
marily on the ground or vegetation. Scent to detect the presence of a hidden enemy and to
tracking is following men or animals by their follow him, to find and avoid mines or booby-
smell. traps, and to give early warning of ambush.
CONTENTS
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E-1 LITTERING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E-8
TRACKER QUALITIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E-1 CAMOUFLAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E-8
INTERPRETATION/IMMEDIATE
FUNDAMENTALS OF TRACKING . . . . . . . . . . . E-2
USE INTELLIGENCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E-8
DISPLACEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E-2
TRACKING TEAMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E-9
STAINING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E-6 TRACKER DOGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E-10
WEATHERING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E-7 COUNTERTRACKING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E-10
E-1

FM 21-75
With common sense and a degree of exper- To find the answer to such questions, use
ience, you can track another person. However, all available signs. A sign can be anything that
you must develop the following traits and shows you that a certain act took place at a
qualities: particular place and time. For instance, a foot-
print tells a tracker that at a certain time a
Be patient. person walked on that spot.
Be able to move slowly and quietly, The six fundamentals of tracking are:
yet steadily, while detecting and inter-
preting signs. Displacement.
Avoid fast movement that may cause Staining.
you to overlook signs, lose the trail,
Weathering.
or blunder into an enemy unit.
Littering.
Be persistent and have the skill and
desire to continue the mission even
Camouflaging.
though signs are scarce or weather or
terrain is unfavorable. Interpretation and/or immediate use
intelligence.
Be determined and persistent when
trying to find a trail that you have lost. Any sign that you find can be identified
as one or more of the first five fundamentals.
Be observant and try to see things In the sixth fundamental, you combine the
that are not obvious at first glance. first five and use all of them to form a picture
of the enemy.
Use your senses of smell and hearing
to supplement your sight.
DISPLACEMENT
Develop a feel for things that do not
Displacement takes place when something
look right. It may help you regain
is moved from its original position. An example
a lost trail or discover additional
is a footprint in soft, moist ground. The foot
signs.
of the person that left the print displaced the
soil, leaving an indentation in the ground. By
Know the enemy, his habits, equip-
studying the print, you can determine many
ment, and capability.
facts. For example, a print that was left by
a barefoot person or a person with worn or
FUNDAMENTALS OF frayed footgear indicates that he may have
TRACKING poor equipment.
When tracking an enemy, you should build
HOW TO ANALYZE FOOTPRINTS
a picture of him in your mind. Ask yourself
such questions as: How many persons am I Footprints show the following:
following? How well are they trained? How are
they equipped? Are they healthy? How is their The direction and rate of movement
morale? Do they know they are being followed? of a party.
E-2

FM 21-75
The number of persons in a party. a heavy load is probably being carried by the
person who left the prints.
Whether or not heavy loads are car-
ried. You can also determine a person’s sex by
studying the size and position of the footprints.
The sex of the members of a party. Women generally tend to be pigeon-toed,
while men usually walk with their feet pointed
Whether the members of a party know straight ahead or slightly to the outside.
they are being followed. Women’s prints are usually smaller than men’s,
and their strides are usually shorter.
If the footprints are deep and the pace
is long, the party is moving rapidly. Very long If a party knows that it is being followed,
strides and deep prints, with toe prints deeper it may attempt to hide its tracks. Persons
than heel prints, indicate that the party is walking backward have a short, irregular stride.
running. If the prints are deep, short, and widely The prints have an unusually deep toe. The soil
spaced, with signs of scuffing or shuffling, will be kicked in the direction of movement.
E-3

FM 21-75
The last person walking in a group usually
leaves the clearest footprints. Therefore, use
his prints as the key set. Cut a stick the length
of each key print and notch the stick to show the
print width at the widest part of the sole. Study
the angle of the key prints to determine the
direction of march. Look for an identifying mark
or feature on the prints, such as a worn or frayed
part of the footwear. If the trail becomes vague
or obliterated, or if the trail being followed
merges with another, use the stick to help iden-
tify the key prints. That will help you stay on
the trail of the group being followed.
Use the box method to count the number
of persons in the group. There are two ways to
use the box method — the stride as a unit of
measure method and the 36-inch box method.
The stride as a unit of measure method is
the most accurate of the two. Up to 18 persons
can be counted using this method. Use it when
the key prints can be determined. To use this
method, identify a key print on a trail and draw
a line from its heel across the trail. Then move
forward to the key print of the opposite foot
and draw a line through its instep. This should
form a box with the edges of the trail forming
two sides, and the drawn lines forming the
other two sides. Next, count every print or
partial print inside the box to determine the
E-4

FM 21-75
number of persons. Any person walking nor-
mally would have stepped in the box at least
one time. Count the key prints as one.
To use the 36-inch box method, mark off
a 30- to 36-inch cross section of a trail, count
the prints in the box, then divide by two to
determine the number of persons that used the
trail. (Your M16 rifle is 39 inches long and may
be used as a measuring device.)
OTHER SIGNS OF DISPLACEMENT
Footprints are only one example of dis-
placement. Displacement occurs when any-
thing is moved from its original position. Other
examples are such things as foliage, moss, vines,
sticks, or rocks that are moved from their origi-
nal places; dew droplets brushed from leaves;
stones and sticks that are turned over and
show a different color underneath; and grass or
other vegetation that is bent or broken in the
direction of movement.
E-5

FM 21-75
Bits of cloth may be torn from a uniform flushed from their natural habitats. You may
and left on thorns, snags, or the ground, and hear the cries of birds that are excited by strange
dirt from boots may make marks on the ground. movements. The movement of tall grass or
brush on a windless day indicates that some-
Another example of displacement is the thing is moving the vegetation from its original
movement of wild animals and birds that are position.
When you clear a trail by either breaking slippery footing or in places where he walks
or cutting your way through heavy vegetation, carelessly. Rocks may be displaced from their
you displace the vegetation. Displacement original position, or turned over to show a
signs can be made while you stop to rest with lighter or darker color on their opposite side.
heavy loads. The prints made by the equipment A person entering or leaving a stream may
you carry can help to identify its type. When create slide marks, wet banks, or footprints, or
loads are set down at a rest halt or campsite, he may scuff bark off roots or sticks. Normally,
grass and twigs may be crushed. A sleeping a person or animal will seek the path of least
man may also flatten the vegetation. resistance. Therefore, when you search a stream
for exit signs, look for open places on the banks
In most areas, there will be insects. Any
or other places where it would be easy to leave
changes in the normal life of these insects may
the stream.
be a sign that someone has recently passed
through the area. Bees that are stirred up, and
STAINING
holes that are covered by someone moving over
A good example of staining is the mark left
them, or spider webs that are torn down are
by blood from a bleeding wound. Bloodstains
good clues.
often will be in the form of drops left by a
If a person uses a stream to cover his trail, wounded person. Blood signs are found on the
algae and water plants may be displaced in ground and smeared on leaves or twigs.
E-6

FM 21-75
You can determine the location of a wound By studying the effects of weather on
on a man being followed by studying the blood- signs, you can determine the age of the sign.
stains. If the blood seems to be dripping stead- For example, when bloodstains are fresh, they
ily, it probably came from a wound on his trunk. may be bright red. Air and sunlight will change
A wound in the lungs will deposit bloodstains the appearance of blood first to a deep ruby-red
that are pink, bubbly, frothy. A bloodstain color, and then to a dark brown crust when the
deposited from a head wound will appear heavy, moisture evaporates. Scuff marks on trees or
wet, and slimy, like gelatin. Abdominal wounds bushes darken with time. Sap oozes from fresh
often mix blood with digestive juices so that cuts on trees but it hardens when exposed to
the deposit will have an odor. The stains will be the air.
light in color.
FOOTPRINTS
Staining can also occur when a person
walks over grass, stones, and shrubs with muddy Footprints are greatly affected by weather.
boots. Thus, staining and displacement together When a foot displaces soft, moist soil to form a
may give evidence of movement and indicate print, the moisture holds the edges of the print
the direction taken. Crushed leaves may stain intact and sharp. As sunlight and air dry the
rocky ground that is too hard for footprints. edges of the print, small particles that were
held in place by the moisture fall into the print,
Roots, stones, and vines may be stained making the edges appear rounded. Study this
by crushed leaves or berries when walked on. process carefully to estimate the age of a print.
Yellow stains in snow may be urine marks left If particles are just beginning to fall into a print,
by personnel in the area. it is probably fresh. If the edges of the print are
dried and crusty, the prints are probably at
In some cases, it may be hard to determine least an hour old. The effects of weather will
the difference between staining and displace- vary with the terrain, so this information is
ment. Both terms can be applied to some signs. furnished as a guide only.
For example, water that has been muddied may
indicate recent movement. The mud has been A light rain may round out the edges of
displaced and it is staining the water. Stones a print. Try to remember when the last rain
in streams may be stained by mud from boots. occurred in order to put prints into a proper
Algae can be displaced from stones in streams time frame. A heavy rain may erase all signs.
and can stain other stones or bark.
Wind also affects prints. Besides drying
Water in footprints in swampy ground
out a print, the wind may blow litter, sticks,
may be muddy if the tracks are recent. In time,
or leaves into it. Try to remember the wind
however, the mud will settle and the water will
activity in order to help determine the age of a
clear. The clarity of the water can be used to esti-
print. For example, you may think, “It is calm
mate the age of the prints. Normally, the mud
now, but the wind blew hard an hour ago. These
will clear in 1 hour. That will vary with terrain.
prints have litter blown into them, so they
must be over an hour old.” You must be sure,
WEATHERING however, that the litter was blown into the
prints, and was not crushed into them when
Weather may either aid or hinder track- the prints were made.
ing. It affects signs in ways that help determine
how old they are, but wind, snow, rain, and Trails leaving streams may appear to be
sunlight can also obliterate signs completely. weathered by rain because of water running
E-7

FM 21-75
into the footprints from wet clothing or equip-
CAMOUFLAGE
ment. This is particularly true if a party leaves
a stream in a file. From this formation, each If a party knows that you are tracking it,
person drips water into the prints. A wet trail it will probably use camouflage to conceal its
slowly fading into a dry trail indicates that the movement and to slow and confuse you. Doing
trail is fresh. so, however, will slow it down. Walking back-
ward, brushing out trails, and moving over
WIND, SOUNDS, AND ODORS rocky ground or through streams are examples
of camouflage that can be used to confuse you.
Wind affects sounds and odors. If the wind
is blowing from the direction of a trail you are
The party may move on hard surfaced,
following, sounds and odors are carried to you.
frequently traveled roads or try to merge with
If the wind is blowing in the same direction as
traveling civilians. Examine such routes with
the trail you are following, you must be cautious
extreme care, because a well-defined approach
as the wind will carry your sounds toward the
that leads to the enemy will probably be mined,
enemy. To find the wind direction, drop a hand-
ambushed, or covered by snipers.
ful of dry dirt or grass from shoulder height.
To help you decide where a sound is coming The party may try to avoid leaving a
from, cup your hands behind your ears and trail. Its members may wrap rags around their
slowly turn. When the sound is loudest, you boots, or wear soft-soled shoes to make the
are probably facing the origin of sound. When edges of their footprints rounder and less dis-
moving, try to keep the wind in your face. tinct. The party may exit a stream in column or
line to reduce the chance of leaving a well-
SUN defined exit.
You must also consider the effects of the If the party walks backward to leave a
sun. It is hard to look or aim directly into the confusing trail, the footprints will be deepened
sun. If possible, keep the sun at your back. at the toe, and the soil will be scuffed or dragged
in the direction of movement.
LITTERING
If a trail leads across rocky or hard ground,
Poorly trained units may leave trails of try to work around that ground to pick up the
litter as they move. Gum or candy wrappers, exit trail. This process works in streams as
ration cans, cigarette butts, remains of fires, or well. On rocky ground, moss or lichens growing
human feces are unmistakable signs of recent on the stones could be displaced by even the
movement. most careful evader. If you lose the trail, return
to the last visible sign. From there, head in the
Weather affects litter. Rain may flatten direction of the party’s movement. Move in
or wash litter away, or turn paper into pulp. ever-widening circles until you find some signs
Winds may blow litter away from its original to follow.
location. Ration cans exposed to weather will
rust. They first rust at the exposed edge where INTERPRETATION/IMMEDIATE
they were opened. Rust then moves in toward USE INTELLIGENCE
the center. Use your memory to determine the
age of litter. The last rain or strong wind can be When reporting, do not report your inter-
the basis of a time frame. pretations as facts. Report that you have seen
E-8

FM 21-75
signs of certain things, not that those things found that has signs of recent enemy activity,
actually exist. your leader can set up an ambush on it.
Report all information quickly. The term
“immediate use intelligence” includes infor- TRACKING TEAMS
mation of the enemy that can be put to use at
once to gain surprise, to keep the enemy off Your unit may form tracking teams. The
balance, or to keep him from escaping an area. lead team of a moving unit can be a tracking
A commander has many sources of intelligence. team, or a separate unit may be a tracking team.
He puts the information from those sources There are many ways to organize such teams,
together to help determine where an enemy is, and they can be any size. There should, however,
what he may be planning, and where he may be a leader, one or more trackers, and security
be going. for the trackers. A typical organization has three
trackers, three security men, and a team leader
Information you report gives your leader with a radiotelephone operator (RATELO).
definite information on which he can act at
once. For example, you may report that your When a team is moving, the best tracker
leader is 30 minutes behind an enemy unit, that should be in the lead, followed by his security.
the enemy is moving north, and that he is now The two other trackers should be on the flanks,
at a certain place. That gives your leader infor- each one followed and overmatched by his
mation on which he can act at once. He could security. The leader should be where he can
then have you keep on tracking and move best control the team. The RATELO should be
another unit to attack the enemy. If a trail is with the leader.
E-9

FM 21-75
TRACKER DOGS
Tracker dogs may be used to help track
an enemy. Tracker dogs are trained and used
by their handlers. A dog tracks human scent
and the scent of disturbed vegetation caused
by man’s passing.
Tracker dogs should be used with tracker
teams. The team can track visually, and the dog
and handler can follow. If the team loses the
signs, then the dog can take over. A dog can
track faster than a man tracks, and a dog can
track at night.
A tracker dog is trained not to bark and
give away the team. It is also trained to avoid
baits, cover odors, and deodorants used to
throw it off the track.
COUNTERTRACKING
In addition to knowing how to track, you
must know how to counter an enemy tracker’s
efforts to track you. Some countertracking
techniques are discussed in the following
paragraphs:
While moving from close terrain to
open terrain, walk past a big tree
(30 cm [12 in] in diameter or larger)
toward the open area for three to five
paces. Then walk backward to the for-
ward side of the tree and make a
90-degree change of direction, passing
the tree on its forward side. Step care-
fully and leave as little sign as possible.
If this is not the direction that you
want to go, change direction again
about 50 meters away using the same
technique. The purpose of this is to
draw the enemy tracker into the open
area where it is harder for him to track.
That also exposes him and causes him
to search the wrong area.
When approaching a trail (about 100
meters from it), change your direction
of movement and approach it at a
E-10

FM 21-75
45-degree angle. When arriving at the
trail, move along it for about 20 to 30
meters. Leave several signs of your
presence. Then walk backward along
the trail to the point where you joined
it. At that point, cross the trail and
leave no sign of your leaving it. Then
move about 100 meters at an angle of
45 degrees, but this time on the other
side of the trail and in the reverse of
your approach. When changing direc-
tion back to your original line of march,
the big tree technique can be used. The
purpose of this technique is to draw
the enemy tracker along the easier
trail. You have, by changing direction
before reaching the trail, indicated that
the trail is your new line of march.
E-11
161-017 0 - 94 - 7

FM 21-75
To leave a false trail and to get an on hard ground. Use this technique
enemy tracker to look in the wrong when leaving a stream. To further
direction, walk backward over soft confuse the enemy tracker, use this
g—round. Continue this deception for technique several times before actuall.v
about 20 to 30 meters or until you are leaving the stream.
When moving toward a stream, change initial direction. Changing direction
direction about 100 meters before before entering the stream may con-
reaching the stream and approach fuse the enemy tracker. When he
it at a 45-degree angle. Enter the enters the stream, he should follow
stream and proceed down it for at the false trail until the trail is lost.
least 20 to 30 meters. Then move back That will put him well away from
upstream and leave the stream in your you.
E-12

FM 21-75
When your direction of movement
parallels a stream, use the stream to
deceive an enemy tracker. Some tac-
tics that will help elude a tracker are
as follows:
Stay in the stream for 100 to 200
meters.
Stay in the center of the stream
and in deep water.
Watch for rocks or roots near the
banks that are not covered with
moss or vegetation and leave the
stream at that point.
Walk out backward on soft ground.
Walk up a small, vegetation-covered
tributary and exit from it.
When being tracked by an enemy
tracker, the- best bet is to either try
to outdistance him or to double back
and ambush him.
E-13

FM 21-75
APPENDIX F
Survival, Evasion, Resistance, And Escape
GENERAL
Continuous operations and fast-moving battles
increase your chances of becoming temporarily sepa-
rated from your unit. Whether you are separated
from a small patrol or a large unit, your mission after
being separated is to rejoin your unit.
This appendix provides techniques to help you
find your way back to your unit. For a more detailed
discussion, see FM 21-76.
SURVIVAL
CONTENTS
Survival is the action of staying alive in
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . F-1
the field with limited resources. You must try
to survive when you become separated from SURVIVAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . F-1
your unit, are evading the enemy, or during the
RESISTANCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . F-2
time you are a prisoner. Survival requires a
knowledge of how to live off the land and take
SECURITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . F-4
care of yourself.
F-l

FM 21-75
EVASION
Evasion is the action you take to stay In day or night, the successful use of silent
out of the hands of the enemy when separated weapons requires great skill and stealthy
from your unit and in an enemy area. There are movement.
several courses of action you may take to avoid
capture and rejoin your unit.
RESISTANCE
You may stay in your current position and The Code of Conduct is an expression of
wait for friendly troops to find you. This may the ideals and principles which traditionally
be a good course of action if you are sure that have guided and strengthened American fight-
friendly units will continue to operate in the ing men and the United States. It prescribes the
area, and if there are a lot of enemy units in manner in which every soldier of the United
this area. States armed forces must conduct himself when
captured or when faced with the possibility
You may break out to a friendly area. This of capture.
may be a good course of action if you know
where a friendly area is, and if the enemy is You should never surrender of your own
widely dispersed. free will. Likewise, a leader should never sur-
render the soldiers under his command while
You may move farther into enemy territory they still have the means to resist.
to temporarily conduct guerrilla-type opera-
tions. This is a short-term course of action to If captured, you must continue to resist
be taken only when other courses of action are in every way you can. Some rules to follow are:
not feasible. This may be a good course of action
Make every effort to escape and to
when the enemy area is known to be lightly
help others escape.
held, or when there is a good chance of linking
up with friendly guerrillas.
Do not accept special favors from the
enemy.
You may combine two or more of these.
For example, you may stay in your current
Do not give your word not to escape.
position until the enemy moves out of the area
and then break out to a friendly area.
Do nothing that will harm a fellow
prisoner.
There may be times when you will have to
kill, stun, or capture an enemy soldier without Give no information except name,
alerting other enemy in the area. At such rank, social security number, and date
times, a rifle or pistol makes too much noise, of birth.
and you will use a silent weapon. Some silent
weapons are: Do not answer any questions other
than those concerning your name,
The bayonet. rank, social security number, and date
of birth.
The garotte (a choke wire or cord with
handles). ESCAPE
Improvised clubs. Escape is the action you take to get away
F-2

FM 21-75
from the enemy if you are captured. The best
time for you to escape is right after you are
captured. You will probably be in your best
physical condition at that time. Prison rations
are usually barely enough to sustain life, cer-
tainly not enough to build up a reserve of
energy. The physical treatment, medical care,
and rations of prison life quickly cause physical
weakness, night blindness, and loss of coordina-
tion and reasoning power.
The following are other reasons for making
an early escape:
Friendly fire or air strikes may cause
enough confusion and disorder to pro-
tide a chance of escape.
The first guards you have probably
will not be as well trained in handling
prisoners as guards farther back.
Some of the first guards may be walk-
ing wounded who are distracted by
their own condition.
You know something about the area
where you are captured and may know
the locations of nearby friendly units.
The way you escape depends on what
you can think of to fit the situation.
The only general rules are to escape
early and escape when the enemy is
distracted.
Once you have escaped, it may not be
easy to contact friendly troops — even when
you know where they are. You should contact a
friendly unit as you would if you were a member
of a lost patrol. You should time your move-
ment so that you pass through enemy units at
night and arrive at a friendly unit at dawn. A
good way to make contact is to find a ditch or
F-3

FM 21-75
shallow hole to hide in where you have cover Use camouflage.
from both friendly and enemy fire. At dawn,
you should attract the attention of the friendly Move around only when necessary.
unit by waving a white cloth, shouting, showing Stay as quiet as possible.
a panel, or some other way. This should alert
Look and listen for enemy activity in
the friendly unit and prepare it to accept you.
your sector.
After the unit has been alerted, you should
shout who you are, what your situation is, and
Use lights only when necessary.
ask for permission to move toward the unit.
Do not write information about an
SECURITY operation on your map.
Do not take notes or papers about an
In combat, you must always think of
operation into combat.
security. You must do everything possible for
the security of yourself and your unit.
Do not take personal items into
combat.
The following are some basic things to do
for security:
Do not leave trash lying about.
Be awake and alert. Tie or tape down equipment to keep it
from rattling.
Stay dressed and ready for action.
Use challenge and password.
Keep your equipment packed when it
is not being used. Do not give military information to
strangers.
Keep your equipment and weapon in
good operating condition. Remember the Code of Conduct.
F-4

FM 21-75
APPENDIX G
Weapons And Fire Control
GENERAL
You must know how to fire your weapon and
how to control your fire. This appendix covers the
characteristics of the weapons you will be using and
discusses characteristics of fire and methods of fire
control.
CONTENTS
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G-1
WEAPONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G-2
CHARACTERISTICS
OF FIRE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G-11
FIRE DISTRIBUTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G-17
COVERING THE
TARGET AREA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G-18
FIRE CONTROL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . G-19
G-1

FM 21-75
WEAPONS
M1911A1 PISTOL
This pistol fires caliber .45 rounds. It is
a semiautomatic, recoil-operated magazine-fed
handgun. It fires one round each time the trig-
ger is pulled. Its magazine holds seven rounds.
The top round is stripped from the magazine
and chambered by the forward movement of
the slide. When the last round in the magazine
has been fired, the slide stays to the rear.
M60 MACHINE GUN
This gun fires 7.62-mm rounds. It is belt-
fed, gas-operated, and automatic. It has an
M16A1 RIFLE
attached bipod and a separate tripod mount.
This rifle fires 5.56-mm rounds. It is The prone position, using the M122 tripod
magazine-fed and gas-operated. It can shoot and the traversing and elevating mechanism,
either semiautomatic or automatic fire through allows the most accurate fire. Some vehicular
the use of a selector lever. The most stable mounts, such as the pedestal mount on the
firing positions (those which allow the most M151 ¼-ton vehicle, are available for this gun.
accurate fire) are the prone supported or stand- When the gunner is standing, the gun may be
ing supported for semiautomatic fire and the fired from the hip, underarm, or shoulder firing
prone bipod supported for automatic fire. position.
G-2

FM 21-75
G-3

FM 21-75
40-MM GRENADE LAUNCHER, M203 M433 High-Explosive Dual Purpose (HEDP)
Round. This round can penetrate 5 cm (2 in)
This grenade launcher (GL) is attached to
of armorplate, 30 cm (12 in) of pine logs, 40 cm
an M16A1 rifle. The rifle has already been dis-
(16 in) of concrete blocks, or 50 cm (20 in) of
cussed. The GL is a single-shot, breech-loaded,
sandbags at ranges up to 400 meters. It has a
pump-action weapon. It fires a variety of
5-meter casualty radius against exposed troops.
rounds. It can be used to suppress targets in
defilade. The GL can be used to suppress or
disable armored vehicles, except tanks. Its
HEDP round can penetrate concrete, timber,
sandbagged weapon positions, and some build-
ings. Other rounds can be used to illuminate and
signal. The most stable firing positions are the
standing supported and the prone supported.
M651 CS Round. This chemical round is used
to drive the enemy from bunkers or enclosed
positions in built-up areas.
G-4

FM 21-75
M583 White Star Parachute/M661 Green Star
Parachute/M662 Red Star Parachute Rounds.
These are used to signal and illuminate. One
can be placed 300 meters forward of a squad to
illuminate an area 200 meters in diameter for
40 seconds.
M585 White Star Cluster/M663 Green Star
Cluster/M664 Red Star Cluster Rounds. They are
used to signal.
NOTE:
THE GREEN STAR CLUSTER MAY
APPEAR WHITE IN BRIGHT SUNLIGHT.
G-5

FM 21-75
M713 Red Ground Smoke/M715 Green Smoke/
M716 Yellow Smoke Rounds. These are used to
mark locations, not for screening.
LIGHT ANTITANK WEAPON (LAW)
This is a shoulder-fired, short-range anti-
tank weapon. The most stable firing positions
G-6

FM 21-75
for firing LAWs are the standing supported, over sequence firing, as it lets the gunners get
prone, and prone supported. hits fasten the gunner firing the second round
can be ready to fire as soon as the first round
The M72A2 LAW consists of a 66-mm impacts. In sequence firing, you must get
HEAT (high explosive antitank) rocket in a another LAW, establish a sight picture, and
disposable fiberglass and aluminum launcher fire. Pair firing also has the advantage of having
tube. Its light weight and its ability to pene- two gunners track the target at one time.
trate more than 30 cm (12 in) of armor make
it useful against enemy armor, bunkers, and Volley firing. In volley firing, you and one or
other hard targets out to a range of 200 meters. more other gunners fire at once. Before firing,
each gunner prepares one or more LAWs Gun-
ners fire on command or on signal until the
The four methods of engagement with
target is destroyed for example, TANK, 100
a LAW are single, sequence, pair, and volley
METERS, SLOW TARGET, VOLLEY FIRE,
firing. The two best methods of engagement are
READY, AIM, FIRE. Volley fire is used only
volley firing and pair firing.
when the range to the target and the lead have
been determined. Range can be determined
Single firing. In single firing, you fire at a
by map, by pacing, or by the results of pair
target with only one LAW. This method is used
firing after a target has been hit. The volley
only at ranges of 50 meters or less. Beyond that
method is best because more rounds are fired at
range, single firing is ineffective, as the chance
a target at one time. That increases the chance
of a first-round hit is low.
of a hit.
Sequence firing. In sequence firing, you pre-
pare several launchers for firing. After firing M202A1, MULTISHOT ROCKET LAUNCHER
the first LAW, note its impact. If you get a hit, 66-MM (FLASH)
continue to fire, using the same sight picture,
until the target is destroyed. If the first round is This is a lightweight, four-tube, 66-mm
a miss, adjust the range and lead of succeeding rocket launcher (RL). Aim and fire it from the
rounds until you get a hit. Then continue to fire right shoulder in the standing, kneeling, or
until the target is destroyed. prone position. It can fire a single rocket or up
to four rockets semiautomatically at a rate of
Pair firing. In pair firing, you and another one rocket per second. It is reloaded with a new
gunner prepare two or more LAWs each, and clip of four rockets. The brilliant splash of the
fire at a target one at a time. You swap infor- bursting incendiary warhead makes it a good
mation when firing at the target. The gunner weapon to suppress enemy rocket gunners.
seeing a target identifies it and gives the esti- When it impacts near enemy vehicles, it will
mated range and lead he will use (for example, make them button up. The most stable position
TANK, 150 METERS, FAST TARGET), then for firing the FLASH is the standing supported
fires. If the first gunner misses, the second position. When you fire it from a fighting posi-
gunner quickly announces a revised estimate of tion, there are two limitations. First, overhead
range and lead (as appropriate) and fires. Both cover can limit the elevation of the RL and
gunners continue exchanging range and lead therefore the range. Second, when elevating
information until one gets a hit. Once the range the RL, you must make sure that the rear of the
and lead are determined, gunners fire at the tar- launcher is outside the hole so that its backblast
get until it is destroyed. Pair firing is preferred is not deflected on you.
G-7

FM 21-75
M47 DRAGON MEDIUM ANTITANK
WEAPON
This is a wire-guided missile system. It is
man-portable and shoulder-fired. The Dragon
actually rests on your shoulder and the front
bipod legs. It has two major components, the
tracker and the round, The round (the expend-
able part of the system) has two major parts,
the launcher and the missile. These are pack-
aged together for handling and shipping. The
launcher is both the handling and carrying con-
tainer and the tube from which the missile is
fired. The tracker is the reusable part of the
system. It is designed for fast, easy detachment
from the round.
G-8

FM 21-75
To fire the Dragon, look through the sight
in the tracker, put the crosshairs on the target,
and fire. Keep the crosshairs on the target
throughout the missile’s flight. The missile is
continuously guided along your line-of -sight.
The tracker detects deviations from the line-of-
sight and sends corrections to the missile by
a wire link.
CALIBER .50 MACHINE GUN
This gun is belt-fed and recoil-operated.
You can fire a single shot and automatic from
the M3 tripod mount or the M63 antiaircraft
mount. Fire bursts of 9 to 15 rounds to hit
ground targets from a stationary position. To
fire at aircraft, use a continuous burst, rather
than several short bursts. While firing on the
move, “walk” long bursts into the target. You
can suppress enemy antitank guided missile
(ATGM) gunners, vehicles, and troops with
a heavy volume of fire from the caliber .50
machine gun until a friendly maneuver element
can destroy or bypass the enemy.
G-9

FM 21-75
G-10

FM 21-75
M67 90-MM RECOILLESS RIFLE (RCLR)
This RCLR is a breech-loaded, single-
shot, man-portable, crew-served weapon. You
can use it in both antitank and antipersonnel
roles. You can fire it from the ground, using the
bipod or the monopod, or from the shoulder.
The most stable firing position is the prone
position.
CHARACTERISTICS OF FIRE
TRAJECTORY
This is the path of a projectile from a
weapon to the point of impact.
At ranges out to 300 meters, the trajectory
of rifle fire is almost flat. For greater ranges,
G-11

FM 21-75
you must raise the rifle muzzle, thus raising
the height of the trajectory.
The GL has a high trajectory that is differ-
ent from that of a rifle. The GL muzzle velocity
is slow when compared to that of a rifle, but it
is fast enough to have a flat trajectory out to
150 meters. For targets at greater ranges (150
to 350 meters), you must hold the GL about 20
degrees above the horizontal. This results in
a higher trajectory and increases the time of
flight of the grenade to its target. Because the
trajectory is high and the time of flight long at
ranges beyond 150 meters, winds may blow the
grenade off course. As a grenadier, you must
compensate for this.
DANGER SPACE
This is the space between a weapon and
its target where the trajectory does not rise
above the average height of a standing man
(1.8 meters). It includes the beaten zone.
DEAD SPACE
Any area within a weapon’s sector that
cannot be hit by fire from that weapon is dead
space.
G-12

FM 21-75
CONE OF FIRE
This is the cone-shaped pattern formed
by the paths of rounds in a group or burst.
The paths of the rounds differ and form a cone
because of gun vibration, wind changes, and
variations in ammunition.
BEATEN ZONE
The area on the ground where the rounds
in a cone of fire fall is the beaten zone.
G-13

FM 21-75
CASUALTY RADIUS
This is the area around a projectile’s point
of impact in which soldiers could be killed or
injured by either the concussion or fragmenta-
tion of the projectile.
CLASSES OF FIRE
Fire is classified with respect to the ground
and the target.
Fire with respect to the ground is:
Grazing fire when most of the rounds
do not rise above 1 meter from the
ground.
Plunging fire when the path of the
rounds is higher than a standing man
except in its beaten zone. Plunging fire
is attained when firing at long ranges,
when firing from high ground to low
ground, and when firing into a hillside.
G-14

FM 21-75
Fire with respect to the target is:
Frontal fire when the rounds are fired Flanking fire when the rounds are
directly at the front of the target. fired at the flank of the target.
G-15

FM 21-75
Oblique fire when the long axis of the
beaten zone is oblique to the long axis
of the target.
Enfilade fire when the long axis of the
beaten zone is the same as the long
axis of the target. It can be either
frontal, flanking, or oblique. It is the
best type of fire with respect to the
target because it makes the best use of
the beaten zone.
G-16

FM 21-75
SUPPRESSIVE FIRE
Fire directed at the enemy to keep him
from seeing, tracking, or firing at the target is
suppressive fire. It can be direct or indirect
fire. Smoke placed on the enemy to keep him
from seeing targets is also suppressive fire.
FIRE DISTRIBUTION
When firing at an enemy position, your
leader will distribute his unit’s fire to cover the
position. There are two ways to distribute fire
on a target — point fire and area fire.
METHODS OF DISTRIBUTION
Point Fire. This is fire directed at one point; for
example, an entire team firing at one bunker.
G-17

FM 21-75
Area Fire. This is fire directed to cover an area
both laterally and in depth. If your leader wants
fire on a woodline, he may first fire tracers to
mark its center. Then, he may have the men on
his left fire to the left of the tracers and those
on his right fire to the right of the tracers. This
is the best and quickest way to hit all parts of
an area target.
In area fire, you will fire at likely enemy
positions rather than a general area. Fire first
at that part of the target relative to your posi-
tion in the team. Then distribute your fire over
an area a few meters to the right and left of
your first shot.
COVERING THE TARGET AREA
AUTOMATIC RIFLEMAN
The part of the target which you, as an
automatic rifleman, can hit depends on your
position and the range to the target. When possi-
ble, you cover the entire target. When firing
automatic fire, you tend to fire high; so fire low
at first and then work up to the target.
G-18

FM 21-75
MACHINE GUNNER Standing operating procedures (SOP). These
can reduce the number of oral orders needed
As a machine gunner, fire into the part of
to control fire. SOPs must be known and under-
the target assigned to you by your leader.
stood by all members of the unit. Three SOPs
are the search-fire-check SOP, the return-fire
DRAGON GUNNER
SOP, and the rate-of-fire SOP. A procedure for
As a Dragon gunner, fire into the part of giving fire commands for direct fire weapons
the target assigned to you by your leader. Fire should also be SOP.
only at targets such as armored vehicles and
key weapons. If there are no Dragon targets, The search-fire-check SOP, follows these
fire your rifle. steps:
GRENADIER Step 1
As a grenadier, fire your first grenade into Search your assigned sectors for enemy
the center of the target. Then distribute your targets.
shots over the remaining target area.
Step 2
FIRE CONTROL Fire at any targets (appropriate for
your weapon) seen in your sectors.
WAYS TO COMMUNICATE FIRE
CONTROL Step 3
Your leader will control your fire. The noise While firing in your sectors, visually
and confusion of battle will limit the use of check with– your leader for specific
some methods of control, so he will use the way orders.
or combination of ways that does the job.
The return-fire SOP tells each soldier in
Sound. This includes both voice and devices
a unit what to do in case the unit makes un-
such as whistles and horns. Sound signals are
expected contact with the enemy (in an ambush,
good only for short distances. Their range and
for example). These instructions will vary from
reliability y are reduced by battle noise, weather,
unit to unit and from position to position within
terrain, and vegetation. Voice communications
those units.
may come directly from your leader to you or
they may be passed from soldier to soldier.
The rate-of-fire SOP tells each soldier
Prearranged fire. In prearranged fire, your how fast to fire at the enemy. The rate of fire
leader tells you to start firing once the enemy varies among weapons, but the principle is to
reaches a certain point or terrain feature. When fire at a maximum rate when first engaging
using prearranged fire, you do not have to wait a target and then slow the rate to a point that
for an order to start firing. will keep the target suppressed. That helps
keep weapons from running out of ammunition
Prearranged signals. In this method, your leader
too fast.
gives a prearranged signal when he wants you
to start firing. This can be either a visual signal
FIRE COMMANDS
or a sound signal. Start firing immediately
when you get the signal.
To help identify a target for a direct fire
Soldier-initiated fire. This is used when there is weapon and to control that weapon’s fire, a
no time to wait for orders from your leader. leader may give a fire command to that weapon.
G-19

FM 21-75
A fire command has the following six Method of Fire. This tells you who is to fire. It
parts: may also tell you how much ammunition to
fire. For example, your leader may want only
Alert.
the grenadier to fire at a target. He may also
Direction. want him to fire only three rounds. For ex-
ample, he would say: GRENADIER, THREE
Target Description.
ROUNDS.
Range.
Command to Fire. This tells you when to fire.
Method of Fire. It may be an oral command, or a sound or visual
signal. If your leader wants to control the
Command to Fire.
exact moment of fire, he may say AT MY
COMMAND, (then pause until he is ready)
Alert. This gets your attention. The leader may
FIRE. If he wants your fire to start upon com-
alert you by calling your name or unit designa-
pletion of the fire command, he will simply say
tion, by giving some type of visual or sound
FIRE (without pausing).
signal, by personal contact, or by any other
practical way.
Direction. This tells you which way to look to
see the target. The following are ways to give
the direction to the target:
Your leader may point to a target with
his arm or rifle. This will give you the
general direction of the target.
Your leader may fire tracer ammunition
at a target to quickly and accurately
identify it. However, before firing, he
should show you the general direction.
Your leader may designate certain fea-
Visual signals are the most common means
tures as TRPs before contact is made
of giving fire commands. Arm-and-hand signals,
with the enemy. Each TRP will have
personal examples, and pyrotechnics are some
a number to identify it. He may give a
of the things your leader may use for visual
target’s direction in relationship to
signals.
a TRP. For example FROM TRP 13,
RIGHT 50. That means that the target
Your leader may use arm-and-hand signals
is 50 meters to the right of TRP 13.
to give fire commands when you can see him.
Target Description. This tells you what the He may use flares and smoke grenades to
target is. Your leader should describe it briefly, mark targets in most conditions of visibility.
but accurately. For example MACHINE GUN
POSITION IN THE WOODLINE. Your leader may use his weapon to fire on
a target as a signal; you fire when he fires.
Range. This tells you how far away the target Watch your leader and do as he does. He may
is. The range is given in meters. use tracers to point out targets.
G-20

FM 21-75
APPENDIX H
Held Expedient Antiarmor Devices
GENERAL
There are many weapons that you can use to
destroy a tank or an armored personnel carrier. The
weapons most frequently used are LAWs, Dragons,
TOWs, mines, and high-explosive dual-purpose
(HEDP) rounds of the M203 grenade launcher. There
may be times, however, when you will not have these
weapons available. In such cases, you may have to
use field expedient devices. This appendix describes
some appropriate devices.
HOW TO MAKE EXPEDIENT
DEVICES
CONTENTS
In order to construct some of these de-
vices, you must know how to prime charges
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H-1
electrically and nonelectrically. (app B).
HOW TO MAKE
FLAME DEVICES
EXPEDIENT DEVICES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H-1
These devices are used to obscure the
vision of a vehicle’s crew and to set the vehicle WEAK POINTS OF
afire. The burning vehicle creates smoke and ARMORED VEHICLES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . H-7
heat that will asphyxiate and burn the crew if
they do not abandon the vehicle.
H-1

FM 21-75
Molotov cocktail. This is made with a breakable
container, a gas and oil mixture, and a cloth
wick. To construct it, fill the container (usually
a bottle) with the gas and oil mixture, and then
insert the cloth wick into the container. The
wick must extend both into the mixture and out
of the container. Light the wick before throwing
the Molotov cocktail. When the container hits
a vehicle and breaks, the mixture will ignite,
burning both the vehicle and the personnel
around it.
Eagle fireball. This is made with an ammunition
can, a gas and oil mixture, a white phosphorous
grenade wrapped with detonating cord, tape,
a nonelectric blasting cap, a fuse igniter, and
a grapnel (or rope with bent nails). To construct
an eagle fireball, fill the ammunition can with
the gas and oil mixture. Wrap the grenade with
detonating cord and attach a nonelectric firing
system (app B) to the end of the detonating
cord. Place the grenade inside the can with
H-2

FM 21-75
the time fuse extending out of it. Make a slot in
the can’s lid for the time fuse to pass through
when the lid is closed. If available, attach a
rope with bent nails or a grapnel to the can.
When you throw the can onto a vehicle, the bent
nails or the grapnel will help hold the can on
the vehicle. Before throwing the can, fire the
fuse igniter.
Eagle cocktail. This is made of a plastic or rub-
berized bag (a waterproof bag, a sandbag lined
with a poncho, or a battery case placed inside
a sandbag), a gas and oil mixture, a smoke
grenade, a thermite grenade, tape, string, and
communications wire or cord. To construct an
eagle cocktail, fill the bag with the gas and oil
mixture. Seal the bag by twisting its end and
then taping or tying it. Attach the thermite and
smoke grenades to the bag using tape, string,
or communications wire. When attaching the
grenades, do not bind the safety levers on
the grenades. Tie a piece of string or cord to
H-3

FM 21-75
the safety pins of the grenades. Before throw-
ing the eagle cocktail, pull the safety pins in
both grenades.
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
Place such devices at vulnerable points
to destroy components of tanks and armored
personnel carriers.
Towed charge. This is made of rope or commu-
nications wire, mines or blocks of explosives,
electrical blasting caps, tape, and electrical firing
wire. To construct a towed charge, link a series
of armed antitank mines together with rope or
communications wire. If mines are not available,
use about 25 to 50 pounds of explosives attached
on a board (sled charge). Anchor one end of the
rope on one side of a road and run its other
end across the road to a safe position from
which the charge may be pulled onto the road.
Attach an electric firing system (app B) to each
mine (or to the explosive on the sled charge)
and connect those systems to the firing wire.
Tape the firing wire to the rope running to the
position from which the charge is pulled onto
the road. At that position, conduct a circuit
H-4

FM 21-75
check (app B) and then connect the firing wire
to a blasting machine. Just before a vehicle
reaches the site of the towed charge, pull the
charge onto the road so that it will be run over
by the vehicle. When the vehicle is over it, fire
the charge.
Pole charge. This is made of explosives (TNT or
C4), nonelectric blasting caps, time fuse, deto-
nating cord, tape, string or wire, fuse igniters,
and a pole that is long enough for the mission.
Prime the desired amount of explosives with
two nonelectric firing systems, and attach the
explosives to a board or some other flat material.
The amount of explosives you use depends on
the target to be destroyed. Tie or tape the
board with the explosives to the pole. The time
fuse should only be about 6 inches long. Before
putting a pole charge on a target, fire the fuse
igniters. Some good places to put a pole charge
H-5
161-017 0 - 94 - 8

FM 21-75
on a vehicle are under the turret, over the engine
compartment, in the suspension system, and in
the main gun tube (if the charge is made small
enough to fit in the tube).
Satchel charge. This is made of explosives
(TNT or C4), nonelectric blasting caps, time
fuse, detonating cord, tape, fuse igniters, and
some type of satchel. The satchel can be an
empty sandbag, or demolitions bag, or some
other material. To construct a satchel charge,
fill the satchel with the amount of explosives
needed for the mission. Prime the explosives
with two nonelectric firing systems. Use only
about 6 inches of time fuse. Seal the satchel
with string, rope, or tape, and leave the time
fuse and fuse igniter hanging out of the satchel.
Before throwing a satchel charge onto a target,
fire the fuse igniters.
H-6

FM 21-75
WEAK POINTS OF ARMORED
NOTE: THE LOCATION OF SOME POINTS
VEHICLES
MAY VARY FROM VEHICLE TO VEHICLE.
To use expedient devices successfully, you
must know where the weak points of armored
vehicles are. Some of the common weak points
of armored vehicles are as follows:
The suspension system.
The fuel tanks (especially the external
tanks).
The ammunition storage compart-
ments.
The engine compartment.
The turret ring.
The armor on the sides, top, and rear
(normally not as thick as that on the
front).
H-7

FM 21-75
If a vehicle is “buttoned up” and you compartment, at any external fuel tanks, or at
have no antiarmor weapons, fire your rifle at the hatches. That will not destroy the vehicle,
the vision blocks, at any optical equipment but may hinder its ability to fight.
mounted outside the vehicle, into the engine
H-8

FM 21-75
APPENDIX I
Range Cards
GENERAL
A range card is a rough sketch of the terrain
around a weapon position. In the defense, you prepare
a range card for the squad automatic weapon, the
M60 and caliber .50 machine guns, and the Dragon,
TOW, 106-mm RCLR, 90-mm RCLR, and LAW anti-
armor weapons systems.
RANGE CARD DATA
A range card depicts the following: CONTENTS
Sectors of fire.
GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I-1
A final protective line (FPL) or princi-
pal direction of fire (PDF). RANGE CARD DATA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I-1
Targets and ranges to them. PREPARATION OF AN M60
MACHINE GUN RANGE CARD . . . . . . . . . I-3
Prominent terrain features.
Weapons symbols. RANGE CARD FOR THE
CALIBER .50 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I-10
Marginal data.
ANTIARMOR RANGE
Range cards for antiarmor weapons use CARD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I-10
target reference points (TRP) instead of FPL
and PDF.
I-1

FM 21-75
SECTORS OF FIRE TARGET REFERENCE POINTS
Target reference points are natural or
Each gun is given a primary and a second-
manmade features within your sector that can
ary sector of fire. Fire into your secondary sector
be used for quick location of targets. Target
of fire only if there are no targets in your pri-
reference points are used primarily for con-
mary sector, or if ordered to fire there. Your
trolling DIRECT FIRE weapons only; however,
gun’s primary sector includes an FPL, a PDF,
TRP should appear on the company target list.
or a TRP.
MAXIMUM ENGAGEMENT LINE
FINAL PROTECTIVE LINE
The maximum engagement line is a line
Where terrain allows, your leader assigns beyond which you cannot engage a target. This
an FPL to your weapon. The FPL is a line on line may be closer than the maximum engage-
which you shoot grazing fire across your unit’s ment range of your weapon. Both the terrain
front. and the maximum engagement range of your
weapon will determine the path of the maximum
The FPL will be assigned to you only if engagement line. This line is used for antiarmor
your leader determines there is a good distance range cards.
of grazing fire. If there is, the FPL will then
dictate the location of the primary sector. The
FPL will become the primary sector limit (right
or left) closest to friendly troops. When not
firing at other targets, you will lay your gun on
the FPL or PDF.
DEAD SPACE
Dead space is an area that direct fire
weapons cannot hit. The area behind houses
and hills or within orchards, for example, is
dead space.
PRINCIPAL DIRECTION OF FIRE
When the terrain does not lend itself to an
FPL, your leader will assign a PDF instead.
The direction should be toward a gully or down
a ditch that leads into your position. The gun is
positioned to fire directly down this approach
rather than across the platoon’s front.
TARGETS
Your leader may also designate locations
within your sector of fire where targets are most
likely to appear. These locations should be noted
on your range card.
I-2

FM 21-75
PREPARATION OF AN
M60 MACHINE GUN RANGE CARD
Range cards are prepared immediately Draw your position at the bottom of
upon arrival in your position. To prepare an the sketch. Do not put in the weapon
M60 machine gun range card: symbol at this time.
Orient the card so that both the pri- Fill in the marginal data to include:
mary and secondary sectors of fire (if
assigned) can fit on it. Gun number (or squad).
Draw a rough sketch of the terrain to Unit (only platoon and company).
the front of your position. Include any Date.
prominent natural and manmade fea-
tures which could be likely targets. Magnetic north arrow.
I-3

FM 21-75
Use the lensatic compass to determine
magnetic north and sketch in the mag-
netic north arrow on the card with its
base starting at the top of the marginal
data section.
Determine the location of your gun
position in relation to a prominent ter-
rain feature, such as a hilltop, road
junction or building. If no feature
exists, place the eight-digit map co-
ordinates of your position near the
point where you determined your gun
position to be. If there is a prominent
terrain feature within 1,000 meters of
the gun, use that feature. Do not sketch
in the gun symbol at this time.
Using your compass, determine the
azimuth in mils from the terrain fea-
ture to the gun position. (Compute the
back azimuth from the gun to the
feature by adding or subtracting 3,200
mils.)
Determine the distance between the
gun and the feature by pacing or from
a map.
Sketch in the terrain feature on the
card in the lower left or right hand cor-
ner (whichever is closest to its actual
direction on the ground) and identify it.
Connect the sketch of the position and
the terrain feature with a barbed line
from the feature to the gun.
Write in the distance in meters (above
the barbed line).
Write in the azimuth in mils from the
feature to the gun (below the barbed
line).
PRIMARY SECTOR WITH AN FPL
To add an FPL to your range card:
I-4

FM 21-75
Sketch in the limits of the primary sec-
tor of fire as assigned by your leader.
Sketch in the FPL on your sector
limit as assigned.
Determine dead space on the FPL by
having your buddy walk the FPL.
Watch him walk down the line and
mark spaces which cannot be grazed.
Sketch dead space by showing a break
in the symbol for an FPL, and write in
the range to the beginning and end of
the dead space.
Label all targets in your primary sec-
tor in order of priority. The FPL is
number one.
I-5

FM 21-75
PRIMARY SECTOR WITH A PDF
To prepare your range card when will be target number one in your sec-
assigned a PDF instead of an FPL: tor. All other targets will be numbered
in priority.
Sketch in the limits of the primary
sector of fire as assigned by your leader Sketch in your secondary sector of fire
(sector should not exceed 875 mils, (as assigned) and label targets within
the maximum traverse of the tripod- the secondary sector with the range in
mounted M60). meters from your gun to each target.
Use the bipod when it is necessary
Sketch in the symbol for an automatic to fire into your secondary sector.
weapon oriented on the most dan- The secondary sector is drawn using
gerous target within your sector (as a broken line. Sketch in aiming stakes,
designated by your leader). The PDF if used.
I-6

FM 21-75
DATA SECTION OF M60 RANGE CARD
The data section of the range card lists data section of the card can be placed on the
the data necessary to engage targets identified reverse side or below the sketch if there is room.
in the sketch. The sketch does not have to be Draw a data section block (if you do not have
to scale, but the data must be accurate. The a printed card), with the following items:
I-7

FM 21-75
To prepare the data section of the M60
range card:
Center the traversing handwheel.
Lay the gun for direction.
When assigned an FPL, lock the tra-
versing slide on the extreme left or
right of the bar, depending on which
side of your primary sector the FPL
is on.
Align the barrel on the FPL by moving
the tripod legs. (Do not enter a direc-
tion in the data section for the FPL.)
When assigned a PDF, align your gun
on the primary sector by traversing
the slide to one side and then move the
tripod to align the barrel on your sector
limit. Align on the PDF by traversing
the slide until your gun is aimed at
the center of the target.
Fix the tripod legs in place by digging
in or sandbagging them. The tripod,
once emplaced for fire into the pri-
mary sector, should not be moved.
I-8

FM 21-75
To read the direction to each target: ing from the upper elevating bar first.
(The sketch reads –50/3.)
Lay your gun on the center of the
target. Enter range to each target under the
appropriate column in the data section.
Read the direction directly off the
traversing bar at the left edge of the Enter the description of each target under
traversing bar slide. the appropriate column in the data section.
Enter the reading under the direction REMARKS COLUMN
column of your range card data section.
Fill in the remarks column for each target
as needed:
A reading of left or right is determined by
the direction of your barrel (just the opposite Enter the width and depth (in mils) of
of the slide). linear targets. The —4 in the illustra-
tion indicates that by depressing your
To read elevation for your targets:
barrel 4 mils the strike of your rounds
will go down to ground level along
Lay your gun on the base of the target
the FPL.
by rotating the elevating handwheel.
When entering the width of the target,
Read the number (to include a plus or
be sure to give the width in mils and
minus sign, except for “0” ) above the
express it as two values. For instance,
first visible line on the elevating scale.
the illustration shows that target
The sketch reads –50. number 3 has a width of 15 mils. The
second value, L7, means that once the
Read the number on the elevating
gun is laid on your target, traversing 7
handwheel that is in line with the in-
mile to the LEFT will lay the gun on
dicator.
the left edge of the target.
The sketch reads 3. Enter aiming stake if one is used for
the target.
Enter this reading under the ELEVA-
TION column of your range card data No data for the secondary sector will
section, separating the two numbers be determined since your gun will be
with a slash (/). Always enter the read- fired in the bipod role.
I-9

FM 21-75
RANGE CARD FOR THE
CALIBER .50
The only differences between an M60 and
a caliber .50 range card are as follows:
The machine gun symbol is different.
There are 800 mils of traverse with the
caliber .50 compared to 875 mils with
the M60.
Maximum grazing fire with the caliber
.50 is 1,000 meters compared to 600
meters with the M60.
The caliber .50 machine gun has a
secondary sector of fire; but it must
be marked by aiming stakes since the
caliber .50 machine gun has no bipod.
ANTIARMOR RANGE CARD
The purpose of an antiarmor range card is
to show a sketch of the terrain that a weapon
has been assigned to cover by fire. Range cards
for 90-mm RCLR, 106-mm RCLR, Dragon, and
TOW are all prepared the same. By using a range
card, you can quickly and accurately determine
the information needed to engage targets in
your assigned sector. Before you prepare a
range card, your leader will show you where to
position your weapon so you can best cover your
assigned sector of fire. He will then, again,
point out the terrain you are to cover. He will
do this by assigning you a sector of fire or by
assigning left or right limits indicated by either
terrain features or azimuths. If necessary, he
may also assign you more than one sector of
fire and will designate the sectors as primary
and secondary.
PREPARATION OF THE RANGE CARD
Once you have all the necessary informa-
tion, you can begin preparing your range card,
depending upon the priority of other jobs you
I-10

FM 21-75
must perform (such as preparing and camou-
flaging your firing position). If you are assigned
alternate or supplementary firing positions, a
range card is required for them also.
PROCEDURES
In the lower center of your range card,
indicate your firing position by drawing the
symbol for your assigned weapon. Also indicate
the direction of magnetic north (not a require-
ment for a LAW).
Draw and label your sector sketch. Draw
roads, bridges, buildings, streams, hills, and
woods. Be as accurate as you can.
I-11

FM 21-75
Show the location to your firing positions the azimuth and distance from the terrain
by drawing an arrow from a nearby recognizable feature to your firing position. (This is not a
terrain feature and assign it number one. Add requirement for a LAW.)
Now draw your sector. This is an enclosed line and indicates the maximum range that
line that outlines your sector of fire. The maxi- targets may be engaged.
mum engagement line is a segment of the sector
I-12

FM 21-75
Draw in the dead space in your sector. Be you cannot hit. Remember, your sector of fire
sure to indicate by an enclosed line those areas can be any shape and size.
Next, draw in the range and azimuths to in your sector. (Azimuth is not a requirement
expected target engagement locations and TRPs for a LAW.)
I-13

FM 21-75
Write in marginal data. Marginal data
must include the following:
Type position (primary, supplemen-
tary, or alternate).
Unit designation (to company only).
Date/Time group.
Your range card is finished. The range
card you construct for your sector of fire may
not look exactly like those shown in this manual.
Remember, however, the basic information and
method of construction for all antiarmor range
cards are the same.
Prepare your range card in two copies,
Keep one copy at the weapon and send the other
to your leader.
1-14

FM 21-75
GLOSSARY
Acronyms And Abbreviations
A M
AM amplitude modulation m meter
ammo ammunition mg machine gun
AR automatic rifle min minute
ATGM antitank guided missile MOPP mission-oriented protective posture
MOS military occupational specialty
c
N
CB chemical-biological
NBC nuclear, biological, and chemical
CEOI communications-electronics
operation instructions
O
cm centimeter
OP observation post
E oz ounce
EMP electromagnetic pulse
P
PDF principal direction of fire
F
PW prisoner of war
FM frequency modulation
pwr power
FPL final protective line
ft foot/feet R
RCLR recoilless rifle
G
rd round
GL grenade launcher
RL rocket launcher
H
s
HEDP high explosive dual purpose
SOP standing operating procedure
ht height
SUT small unit leader
I
T
in inch
TNT chemical composition similar to
dynamite
K
TRP target reference point
kg kilogram
km kilometer
U
US United States
L
LAW light antitank weapon W
LCE load-carrying equipment wt weight
GLOSSARY-1

FM 21-75
References
REQUIRED PUBLICATIONS
Required publications are sources which users must read in order to understand or to comply
with FM 21-75.
NONE
RELATED PUBLICATIONS
Related publications are sources of additional information. Users do not have to read them
in order to understand FM 21-75.
FIELD MANUAL (FM)
FM 3-12 Operational Aspects of Radiological Defense
FM 5-25 Explosives and Demolitions
FM 21-11 First Aid for Soldiers
FM 21-40 NBC (Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical) Defense
FM 21-60 Visual Signals
FM 21-76 Survival, Evasion, and Escape
FM 23-9 M16A1 Rifle and Rifle Marksmanship
FM 23-11 90-mm Recoilless Rifle, M67
FM 23-31 40-mm Grenade Launchers M203 and M79
FM 23-35 Pistols and Revolvers
FM 23-65 Browning Machinegun, Caliber .50 HB, M2
FM 23-67 Machinegun, 7.62-mm, M60
FM 90-10-1 An Infantryman’s Guide to Urban Combat
TECHNICAL MANUAL (TM)
TM 9-1345-203-128P Operator’s and Organizational Maintenance Manual Land Mines
GRAPHIC TRAINING AID (GTA)
GTA 5-10-27 Mine Card
REFERENCE-1

FM 21-75
INDEX-1

FM 21-75
INDEX-2

FM 21-75
INDEX-3

FM 21-75
INDEX-4

FM 21-75
INDEX-5

FM 21-75
INDEX-6

FM 21-75
INDEX-7

FM 21-75
INDEX-8

FM 21-75
3 AUGUST 1984
By Order of the Secretary of the Army:
JOHN A. WICKHAM, JR.
General, United States Army
Chief of Staff
Official:
ROBERT M. JOYCE
Major General, United States Army
The Adjutant General
DISTRIBUTION:
Active Army, ARNG, and USAR: To be distributed in accordance with DA Form 12-11 A. Require-
ments for Combat Training of the Individual Soldier and Patrolling (Qty rqr block no. 174).
Additional copies may be requisitioned from the US Army Adjutant General Publications Center,
2800 Eastern Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21220.
H U.S. Government Printing Office: 1994 – 342-421/81779

PIN: 007201-000