Key stage 1 & 2 lesson plan
Natural materials - art
Forestry England looks after more than 1500 woods and forests in
England. Forests provide endless learning opportunities, and are great
places to inspire creativity. Take your class for a visit to your local
forest, and collect materials to make wonderful pieces of natural art.
Curriculum links
Art: (KS1) Using a range of materials creatively; Using sculpture to develop and
share ideas and imagination; Using colour, pattern, texture, shape and form in the
development of artworks. (KS2) Improve mastery of art and design techniques
including drawing and sculpture.
Science: (KS1 & KS2) Plants and animals; Everyday materials; Seasonal changes.
Before your visit
Ask the children to draw a picture of what they think the forest will be like. Invite older
children to add a sentence about the different kinds of natural materials that they
would expect to find in the forest. How would this vary according to the time of year?
For a great introduction to the forest and how it is cared for by Forestry England,
take a look at forestryengland.uk/pre-visit-activities for some resources to
share with your class before you visit.
For health and safety advice and some top tips for teaching
outdoors, visit forestryengland.uk/planning-your-visit
You will need to bring:
• a selection of pictures of animals you would
expect to find in a UK woodland
• laminated scavenger hunt cards –
prepared in advance (see p. 2)
• collecting bags
• simple tree ID guides / keys
• clipboards
• plain paper and wax crayons
For more learning resources visit
forestryengland.uk/learning

Starter activity
How to collect
Find an area in the forest to sit or
with respect
stand in a circle. Give out the pictures
and descriptions of the forest that the
• Collect from the forest floor
children completed at school. wherever possible
• Spread your load – carefully
What things are the same?
collect only a few leaves or
What is different?
petals from any particular
What natural materials did the children
plant or tree
include in their original picture of a forest?
Can they see anything extra, or unexpected? • Do not disturb wildlife
habitats e.g. log piles
Explain that they are going to explore the
forest to discover what materials can be found, • Do not pick berries or fungi
and how they can be used to create pieces of as they may be poisonous
natural art and sculpture.
Scavenger Hunt
Forest scavenger hunt -
Divide the children into small groups and give can you find:
each one a laminated scavenger hunt card and
a collecting bag. The card should contain a list
something prickly
of at least five items for the children to find. something soft
something smooth
When they have found everything on their list, the
children should return to show everyone their treasures. something shiny
something hard
Extension something waxy
Ask the children to look at all of the things that they something yellow
have collected. Can they sort them according to
something round
their characteristics, for example, shape (regular or
something heart-shaped
irregular), colour, where they’ve come from (animal
or plant), dead/alive or never alive? something bendy
2

Forest animal
Art gallery
Forests are great for wildlife.
They provide a range of
different habitats (places
where animals and birds
can make their homes), as
well as supplying the food
that they need to eat.
Can the children name any Encourage the children to look carefully at
the properties of the different materials
woodland animals or birds
that they have collected, and think how
that they might find in a UK
they can use them to create an interesting
forest? and detailed image.
Show the animal pictures you have Older children should try to select
brought as a visual reminder if needed. materials that capture the characteristics
The children are now going to choose of the animal that they have chosen, for
one of these animals as inspiration for example, which materials would work
a piece of artwork. well to express a fox’s bushy tail or a
hedgehog’s prickly spines? Encourage the
Ask the children to work in pairs or children to introduce a sense of energy
individually, to collect four (or more) sticks and movement into their animal picture.
to make a picture frame and then choose
a spot where they would like to make Take photos for a lasting record of
their picture. The children should prepare the children’s works of art.
the ground by gently sweeping the leaf
litter to one side to clear it. This will form
the background to their art work.
Extension
The sticks should be laid on the ground Look for evidence of woodland
to make a square or rectangular frame. animals such as droppings,
Then, using natural materials collected feathers or fur, nests, holes or
from the forest floor, the children can nibbled nuts and cones.
make a picture of their chosen animal
inside the frame.
3

Exploring leaf shape
Find an area where there are conifers
and broadleaves (see box). Ask the
children to look for three different Tree words
tree leaf shapes. Count how many
Coniferous – trees with cones and
different leaf shapes they manage
needles e.g. Scots pine, Douglas fir;
to find altogether. usually evergreen
Do the children know the names of any of them? Broadleaf – trees with broad flat
leaves e.g oak, silver birch; usually
Have they found any leaves from evergreen
deciduous
trees, such as fir, pine or holly?
Evergreen – trees which keep
Discuss the difference between coniferous,
their leaves all year round; mostly
broadleaf, evergreen and deciduous trees.
conifers (but not all e.g. holly is
evergreen, but not a conifer)
Use simple reference guides to identify the
different leaves. Deciduous – trees which lose
their leaves in autumn; mostly
broadleaves (but not all e.g larch is
a deciduous conifer)
Extensions
Leaf rubbing – record different leaf shapes by making
leaf rubbings. Place leaves with the veins uppermost
between a piece of a paper and a clipboard. Hold a wax crayon
flat on its side and rub it over the leaf. Cover the whole piece of
paper with colourful rubbings. You could try bark rubbings as well.
(If wet, take leaves back to school to do the rubbings there).
Leaf Lacing – for this, you will need fresh leaves and small twigs.
Overlap two leaves and push a small thin twig through both leaves
at one end where they overlap. Then push the twig back through the
other side. The twig will now hold the leaves together. Repeat with lots
of leaves. Encourage the children to try different ways of arranging the
leaves; in size order or varying colours. Point out that the front and
back of leaves are different colours. When the children have made a
string of leaves, hang them from a tree for others to enjoy.
Importance of trees – although each tree species is different, with its
own distinct leaf shape, bark and twigs, all trees are important to us for
a variety of reasons. Discuss what trees do for us e.g. helping to reduce
climate change by taking in CO2, releasing oxygen and purifying the air,
providing a renewable fuel source and building material, acting as wind
breaks and giving us shade.
4

Celtic Circle
Can the children think of any
reasons why people visit forests,
e.g. dogwalking, playing, horse
or bike riding?
Explain that forests have
inspired people all over the
world for thousands of years.
Some artists use natural
materials to make pieces of
ephemeral (temporary) art.
Tell the children that you are all going to Remind the children that they are
work together to make a beautiful piece creating a piece of art and that they
of art, in the style of Andy Goldsworthy, should arrange things carefully, making
made entirely from things you can collect, sure that things are placed in the same
and without harming the forest! direction and the right way up.
Ask the children to stand in a fairly large Once they have placed their objects
circle. Clear the area in the centre of the down, they should stand back in the
circle of any leaf litter by gently brushing circle ready to discuss the next layer.
away to the sides with your feet.
Think about using scarce materials for the
Find an attractive tree section or object to first few rings and more readily available
place in the circle centre. materials for the larger outer rings.
Encourage the children to think about all Build up contrasting rings for maximum
of the natural materials they have found effect. After creating about 8 to 9
today, focusing on their colour, shape different rings stand back to admire
and texture. your work. Take a photo as a permanent
record to display back at school!
Can they suggest something to make the
first concentric ring around the object
that you have placed in the circle centre?
Send the children to find several of the
chosen items and then return to place
them down.
5

Back at school
Research how artists use forests and trees in
their artwork. There are a number of sculpture
trails in Forestry England woods that you could
investigate further, e.g. Grizedale in Cumbria
In order to encourage
and the Forest of Dean in Gloucestershire.
people to visit and
enjoy forests, Forestry
As well as sculpture trails, Forestry England
England offers:
provides many other facilities to help people
to enjoy their visit to the forest. • walking trails
• cycling trails
• family events
Some questions to discuss: • parking
• cafes
If you were managing a forest, • picnic sites
what sorts of things would you provide? • and much more
Consider where people would park, whether they would
want to eat or drink during their visit, and what sorts of
activities they would like to do while they were in the forest.
You have already discussed how important trees and
forests are – for timber, people and wildlife – what can
we all do to ensure they are protected and cared for?
FoArlel sFtoryr eEsntgrlya nEdn gland woodlands in
wEonodgllaanndds ahraev eF SC® certified. This
bemene acnerst itfiheadt itnh ey are managed
acccaorredfaunllcye awnitdh r tehsep onsibly. This is not
rutlhees ocfa tshee i nFo arlel spt arts of the world.
StVeiwsiatr fdssch-iupk C.oourngc tiol® find out more.
We’d like to know what
you thought of this Forestry
England lesson plan.
For more information about Forestry
You can get in touch via
England’s sustainable management
of the nation’s forests, please visit
email learning.england@
forestryengland.uk
forestryengland.uk
6