The Six Boy Scout Knots version: 8-20-01
by John Geffre
Bowline
Square Knot
The bowline is used to make a non-slip loop on the end of a
The square knot is used as a binding knot for such things as
rope. It is called the king of knots and it is so dependable that
clamping a pad on a wound, tying a gathering rope on the
it can be used for rescue work.
male end of an extension cord, or as a shoestring knot. The
bowknot we all use to tie our shoes with is really just a double
slipped square knot. The books say not to use the square knot
to tie two ropes together because it can untie itself under the
right conditions but I have used a single slipped square knot
to tie two ropes together for years without a problem yet.
1
1 2 3 4
After the bowline has been formed, you must tighten it
correctly like this.
2
3
Tightened correctly Tightened incorrectly
Clove Hitch
Sheet Bend
The clove hitch is known in the oilfield around here as a claw
The sheet bend is the knot you are “supposed” to use to tie
hitch. It is the best knot to use with stiff large diameter rope
two ropes together. You can tie on to a sheet or blanket with it
because it never makes a sharp bend. It is also used to start
if you fold the corner of the sheet into a point and substitute it
and finish lashings. A lashing is a series of wraps tying two
for the left rope below.
poles together.
Here is how to tie it
1 around a horizontal post.
1
2 1 2
Here is how to tie it
2
around a vertical post.

Two Half Hitches Taut-line Hitch
Two half hitches is my favorite knot. You can tie onto almost The taut-line hitch is my least favorite of the six boy scout
anything with it. In the first step, if you go around the post knots. It is used as an adjustable knot in tent guy lines and
one and a half times instead of just one half time as shown, that’s about all it is used for. This knot has to be internally
you will make a knot called “a round turn and two half tightened quite tight for it to work properly. Two half hitches
hitches” which will grip onto the post extremely well. If you works almost as well as this knot for tent guy lines and the
go around the post two and a half times or more, you will trucker’s knot works even better.
make a knot called “the pipe hitch” which will form a death
grip on the post.
This end goes around a tent stake or a tree
1 2 3 4
1 2 3 4
This end comes from the tent
Other Useful Knots
Overhand Knot The Trucker’s Knot
Use this knot on both ends of your rope to keep This is the most useful knot that I know of. Use it to make a very tight rope
it from unraveling and as a “stopper” knot. I between two objects. The knot in step 1 can be a clove hitch, two half
have found that I like a stopper knot better hitches, or my favorite the hitching tie as shown. The knot in step 3 is called
than “whipping” because both can come off the slip knot. In step 4 after you have pulled the “bight” (bight means “rope
the end of the rope but you can retie an folded in half”) through the slip knot as tight as you can, pinch the crossing
overhand knot quickly and without having to with your left thumb and forefinger so your right hand can tie the knot in
find some whipping material. step 5. The knot formed in step 5 is called a slippery half hitch or a slipped
half hitch. By the way, a hitching tie is actually a slipped slip knot for
anyone who cares about such things.
Coiling a Hitching Tie
If you tie the trucker’s knot using a hitching tie as shown, the whole
conglomeration can be untied with only four pulls in the right places. See if
Rope So cowboy, how do YOU
you can figure out which are the four right places.
tie your horse to the
Learn how to do hitchin’ rack? Learn
this, it is important. how to tie this knot real
fast and you can tie a
rope to anything in
about 3 seconds and
untie it in nothing flat.
1 2 3 4 5 6
1 2